It's really wonderful to see so many of you"
here, especially after seeing such a great group of people'
here for Sou Fujimoto-- very different,'
probably, audience, very different presentation.'
But to see so many wonderful people here for Bruno,'
it's really great.
As you know, Bruno Latour is here'
as our Senior Loeb Scholar.
Every year, we invite a Senior Loeb Scholar who'
spends about a week with us.
And this is organized through the Loeb's office"
with John Peterson.
Sally, the whole team do a wonderful job,'
and they meet and spend time with the Loeb's."
And in fact, this week Bruno is also'
spending time with the MDes program, with John May,'
and some of the students with Anita Berrizbeitia.'
So the idea is that the Senior Loebs are basically'
engaged with the life of the school,'
and they don't just do one lecture,"
but we really benefit from their ideas and their interests'
in different kinds of contexts.
This program has been going on for a number of years.'
And some of the other Loeb Scholars'
that include Ulrich Beck, Arjun Appadurai, Katherine Boo, David'
Harvey, and others.
Before I introduce Bruno, I also want'
to take a minute to let you know that this Thursday,'
October 18, the curator Jose Esparza'
will speak in Stubbins at lunchtime.'
He is the newly minted Executive Director and Chief Curator'
at Storefront for Architecture.
And he will start on November 1.
Landscape Architect and Option Studio Faculty Member Marty'
Poirier will give a lecture on Monday, October 22.'
And on Tuesday, October 23, our next Rouse Visiting Artist'
Lecture of the semester features curator Julieta Gonzalez,'
and visual artist Fritz Haeg, and Nils Norman.'
They will be in conversation about Haeg'
and Norman's recent public art commission"
to design a plaza at the Museo Jumex in Mexico City,'
and the event will take place at 6:30 PM'
here in Piper Auditorium.
In light of last week's dire climate report issued"
by IPCC, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,'
it feels really apt and timely to have Bruno here tonight'
to lecture on Gaia politics and the conceptual idea'
of the seven planets.
Bruno is no stranger to the GSD, and indeed, to Harvard.'
He's been working here, collaborating with colleagues"
like Peter Galison in the History of Science'
for many years here at the GSD.
He's been involved on a number of occasions."
We had a wonderful event here with him and Peter Sloterdijk'
some years ago.
And then we also collaborated on the beginnings'
of what is now our Master in Design Studies in Art'
Design and Public Domain.
Because Bruno at that time, he was at Sciences Po.'
And he was also very interested in the relationship'
between what he called the political arts in France,'
and really having people with the background'
in the social sciences, or maybe design,'
coming in to Sciences Po to study for a Masters that really'
prepared them, in a different way,'
to address the question of the political arts'
in the context of Sciences Po.
I think one of the key reasons why many of us'
are very keen on having Bruno here is because he's really"
a sort of worldly public intellectual, who thinks'
about philosophy, anthropology, and other disciplines,'
but with a very worldly perspective.'
And more and more, a lot of his ideas'
have had connections to the way in which he's already"
thinking about the planet, what's happening to the planet,"
and our actions, our responsibilities,'
and what kind of things can we do.'
It doesn't always directly translate to design,"
but I think it has many consequences for us'
in the context of a design school,'
where we're really thinking about these broader issues,"
where his work is very much about the interrelationship'
of things, and the impact that things have on each other,'
including humans and non-humans.
One of his-- well, he has also published'
so many amazing books.
And I think we want to hear from Bruno very quickly.'
But one of his probably better-known books--'
most of them are very well known-- is the book called'
"We Have Never Been Modern," which was really an earlier'
book.
But I think it's good if I read you maybe even"
the first paragraph from the back of the book,'
to just give you a sense of how some'
of his thinking in relation to science is formed.'
He says, the book says, "With the rise of science,'
we moderns believe the world changed irrevocably,'
separating us forever from our primitive, pre-modern'
ancestors.
But if we were to let go of this fond conviction,"'
Bruno Latour asks, "what would the world look like?"'
His book, An Anthropology of Science'
shows us how much of modernity is actually a matter of faith.'
And I think there is a very beautiful description,'
in the sense that for Bruno, it seems words and themes'
like alchemy, astrology, phrenology--'
they are also part of the very conceptions'
of the pre-modern, which maybe we should not'
let go of so quickly.
And therefore, I think it's really interesting"
when you think about the idea of us being able to sort of think'
through issues or design in a way that doesn't bracket us"
in a very precise way, and excludes'
other notions, other possibilities, and so on.'
As I said, Bruno spent a lot of time'
at the School of MINES in Paris, and then subsequently'
at Sciences Po, where he was responsible for research,'
and set up the program, the Media Lab and the program'
in the political arts.
We're really, really delighted that he's here with us."
There's a lot more to be said, but would you please join me"
in welcoming Bruno Latour.
[applause]
That deafening silence coming from the White House'
after the new report from the IPCC--'
as Mohsen just mentioned-- two weeks ago,'
urging the United Nations to try,'
no matter how hard it appears to be,'
to keep the global temperature below the Paris Agreement'
target of 1.5 degrees can be interpreted as another proof'
of anti-science attitude.
But for the last three years, I've"
been more and more convinced that the continuous, coherent'
and deeply entrenched climate skepticism of the Republican'
Party should be seen as a mark of a great design'
in geopolitics, namely to redesign the United'
States as situated outside of Earth,'
and moving toward another attractor altogether.'
What used to be a lame joke--
"But my poor fellow, you seem to live on another planet,"'
has become the strange goal of a new form of geopolitics.'
Yes, indeed, we do intend to live on another planet.'
Cultural historians would say that the US has always'
been somewhere else than the rest of the world,'
and certainly away from the Old World'
and meshed into it's old, outdated attachment,"
and that it was constructed to be a land of nowhere welcoming'
anybody--
I mean, once the earlier inhabitants'
had been dispossessed, that is.
But this out-thereness, or aloofness, or special destiny'
was figurative only.
It remains symbolic, as in the myth of a city'
on the hill, another such pretension.'
Today, it has become literal.
Everything in politics happens as'
if a large chunk of the planet was moving somewhere else'
than the rest of the world, hoping'
to benefit from another climate, and not'
to be submitted to the same forces of Nature as, let's say,"
China or Indonesia.
Prior to recent US proclamation, when'
historians talk about geopolitics,'
they meant different nations with opposite interests'
waging wars on the same material and geographical stage.'
But today, geopolitics is also concerned'
with wars about the very definition of a stage itself.'
A conflict will be called, from now on, I propose,'
"a planetary relevance," not because it'
has a planet for the stage, but because it's about which planet"
you are claiming to inhabit and to defend.'
And to register this shift in meaning,'
I use the word Gaiapolitics, since I've"
been trying over the years to resurrect the Lovelock-Margulis'
discovery of Gaia, a discovery gains great importance today,'
in my eyes, at least.
I'm starting from a premise shared with Dipesh Chakrabarti"
and a few others.
But what I\'ve called the "new climatic regime"'
organized the whole of political affiliation.'
Tell me what you expect from the climate,'
and I will tell you where you stand on all other issues,'
including the social one.
In Climate Leviathan, a political theory'
of our planetary future, two Marxist social scientists,'
Mann and Wainwright, started from the same premises'
as I, ending with four geopolitical scenarios,'
very much like my planets.
They have one vivid illustration of planetary conflict,'
with this image showing New York City in 2012'
without electricity, in anticipation'
of Hurricane Sandy.
I understand you have a much better one here,'
but I didn't know that.
We are just Marxist scholars after all.'
We don't know anything.
With only the Goldman Sachs tower brightly'
lit thanks to its own generators,'
the same geographical space that is a cartographic grid'
of Manhattan is occupied by two different climatic regimes,'
one submitted to Hurricane Sandy, the other indifferent'
to it.
Banks remain fully operational when everything else'
is coping with a Hurricane.
Like a rocket, it looks-- it's very funny-- at Cape Kennedy."
Goldman Sachs is apparently ready for liftoff.'
The lesson is that on the same cartographic space,'
people belong to different soils or are'
grounded in a different land.
This is typical, I argue, of a Gaiapolitics.'
The question of which people belong to which land'
is foregrounded again.
As I argued at length in Facing Gaia,'
just as at the beginning of modern political philosophy'
at the time of Hobbes, we are no longer dealing with humans'
in Nature, but with divided people engaged in civil wars,'
having to reinvent social order altogether.'
Climate mutation means that the question'
of the land on which we stand is back into focus.'
Everything happens as if Games of Thrones'
has become a general model for considering'
of the politics, except, of course'
that the threat is Armageddon, and not winter, is coming.'
In a long investigative essay in The New York Times'
that confirmed part of a chronology I proposed'
in Down to Earth, Nathaniel Rich adds a third detailed analysis'
of such a bifurcation.
Just when proof of a change in climate condition'
were accumulating as early as during the Reagan'
administration, Rich shows how efficient'
has been the enterprise to deny the coming Armageddon.'
Where certainty about the threat, as well'
as the denial of the threat have grown together,'
some people have seen that the planet will never be the same,'
if scientists were right.
And they decided-- arguably decided somewhat consciously--'
that it was time to move to another one, where'
all the dramatic changes anticipated by scientists'
would not happen, or at least, would not be visible,'
or would not modify the social order.'
Strangely enough, actually, Nathaniel Rich'
missed this point entirely in his own interpretation'
of a document he beautifully shows.'
This is why I think we have to link together three'
40-year-long episodes--
deregulation, explosion of inequalities, and expansion'
of climate denial, which is the subject'
of this just-published Down to Earth.'
Whatever you might think of my interpretation,'
the crucial point is that the climate question is not'
one aspect of politics among others,'
but what defines political order from beginning to end,'
forcing all of us to redefine the older'
question of subsistence and attachment to places, as well'
as social justice.
In recent years, if you want to summarize the argument,'
we have shifted from questions of ecology,'
which is about Nature outside of social order,'
to questions of existential subsistence on threatened'
territories.
Nature is no longer outside, but under our feet.'
And it shakes the ground.
Hence, the general political disorientation,'
especially for the left, who did not'
expect to have to talk again of people and soil,'
a question mostly abandoned to the Right.'
I'm sure you will agree that taking kids to a planetarium"
is a compulsory moment of any education--'
to give them some sense of where they reside in the universe,'
to introduce them to planets, stars, Milky Way, galaxy,'
black holes, and other such esoteric entities.'
Well, I wish tonight to take you for a guided tour in my wholly'
fictional-- sorry, wholly, not holy--'
wholly fictional-- English is complicated for a Frenchman--'
wholly fictional planetarium.
It's a fiction, yes.
Although one thing is sure--
whereas all planetary influences on our horoscopes'
have been thrown into doubt for quite some time, there's"
no question that the gravitational pull'
of another seven planets--
in my reckoning, we are seven only--'
have an immense influence on the way you feel, behave,'
and especially on the way you may predict your destiny.'
So let's take the tour as a fictional astrology,"
verging on serious geopolitics.
And as Mohsen very kindly said, there'
is no direct correlation between architecture and design'
in my talk.
You would have to do the job yourself'
of seeing the connection, but maybe there is one.'
The principle that would lead me in such a reckoning'
is the link between the territory'
necessary for subsistence, and the territory that we recognize'
legally, effectively as our own, and what'
has the source of our freedom and autonomy.'
Territory here, not only in its geographic or administrative'
depiction, but also in what I call Gaiagraphic definition--'
that is, all of the other agents, no matter how remote,'
that allow a good agent--
human or non-human-- to subsist.
These are what its territory consists of.'
So it's a reverse, not the territory administrative,"
but give me the subsistence, and I will'
know what the territory is.
And subsistence has been taken in a very large sense.'
I would start from the assumption'
that the present disorientation is'
due to a fabulous increase in the usual lack of fit'
between the two sets of constraints.'
We inhabit as citizen a land that is not'
the one we could subsist on.
Hence, the increasing feeling of homelessness, a feeling that'
is transforming the former ecological question'
into a new set of more urgent and more tragic political'
struggles.
People everywhere are again looking for land, a situation'
that I\'ve called for this reason "the new wicked universality."'
The first planet I will show shining'
in my little fictional planetarium'
is what could be called The Global--'
that is, the sphere imagined by the attempts'
at modernizing the Earth.
If I call it an imaginary sphere,'
it's for the reason so forcefully"
advanced by Peter Sloterdijk.
Although that property is drawn from cartography, geology'
and some geography, it's a sphere of ideas,"
since it implies that everyone on Earth'
could develop according to the American way'
of life, and forever, and in the absence of any limit.'
It's the globalization as a positive Utopian or dystopian"
ideal, which has been pursued, and still'
has some attraction, until the end of the 20th century.'
And of course, there's another side of the story"
of this Global planet, and that it's entirely colonized,"
in the sense that none of the nations composing its map'
occupies the official space inside its borders'
and frontier.
China, Europe, the United States all occupy territories--'
sorry, all occupy the official space in--'
sorry, all occupy other territory in many ways,'
either forcibly or through the partially'
hidden means of phantom acreage, to use Kenneth Pomeranz'"
powerful expression.
And you know many of his images on types of maps.'
This is what Pierre Charbonnet called'
"the ubiquity of a modem," to underline'
that there is no correspondence at all to expect'
between the shape of a nation-state in a legal sense'
and the wealth its citizens benefit from.'
Belonging to a territory on such a Global Planet'
is a sure way of being misled and lost.'
Your health or your misery come from places'
that are invisible on the administrative map'
of your own land.
And in addition to this imbalance in space,'
there is, as Timothy Mitchell has argued,'
an imbalance in time, since the future in the Global'
is entirely colonized in advance, so'
to speak, by decisions made earlier'
to develop infrastructure but putting you forever'
in dept. The dispute on what to do about getting rid'
of our carbon economy is a good case in point,'
since most investment decisions, as it has been showed recently,'
have already been made.
So paradoxically, no matter if they are rich or poor,'
inhabitants of this Global have no way'
to influence their own future.
TINA, There Is No Alternative, is'
a practical result, which is paradoxical,'
of centuries of obsession with the question of emancipation'
and freedom.
So the Global is simultaneously that'
toward which the whole world was supposed to progress,'
and a totally Utopian skewed domain, where'
time and space have been colonized'
to the point of rendering it inhabitable,'
and of paralyzing any reaction to the threat everyone'
clearly sees coming.
This is nicely emphasized in the well-known argument,'
as you know, I'm sure, about the five planets"
necessary to develop further in a non-American fashion,'
or in moving the data of a calendar'
earlier and earlier every year to celebrate Earth Overshoot'
Day.
France, by the way, overshoot in May 5.'
And you would not be surprised to know'
that you do that in March 15.
So France has still a little--
a month-- less responsibility.
It is very small.
I've often noted this contradiction."
Even though the moderns are supposed'
to be hard-nosed realists, and to possess a fully'
materialistic outlook, their vision'
of where they were supposed to be inhabitants'
remain entirely ideal all along.
In this imaginary global sphere, there'
were no specified climate conditions, no earthly limits,'
no idea of the complexity and heterogeneity of the soil,'
no feel for what allows any lifeforms to live.'
And I'm sure architects feel the pull"
of that planetary attraction.
The paradox is such that this global--'
that is, the horizon for everything universal,'
they say--
is also a cramped space, with no people able to really say in'
it, "This is where I belong.
And it is from here that I draw my subsistence,'
and where I find the sources of my liberties."'
You expect to meet free people, and they sit on their butt--'
Paradise-- unable to react to a small question of a climate'
transformation.
For the last 40 years, this planet has felt the increasing'
gravitational pull, so to speak, of another one,'
which has been named-- and I think it's a good word,"
by Chakrabarty--
"The Planetary."
It's different from the Global, precisely"
because it began to re-materialize'
all the elements that been left aside a bit too fast by those'
who had embarked on the great progressive movement'
toward the Global.
All that was externalized in one planet'
is internalized in this one.
The Planetary is the Global, but where the Earth is'
reacting to human enterprise--
no longer a frame, a stage, but a powerful actor'
with its own agency and its own temp, and also at a scale--'
and that's where the surprise is coming from--"
at a scale that is comparable in size and weight'
to that of the human technosphere.'
And its presence is now captured--'
this is very well-known expressions--'
Earth system, or Lovelock Gaia, or Anthropocene,'
or great acceleration, tipping point, Earth boundary.'
There are many of them.
The whole vocabulary that has transformed what'
was to have been theater stage that'
could be changed by human ingenuity'
into a player intervening as a third party'
in every human activity.
The key point is that it's not Nature as such"
whose immensity, indifference, aloofness,'
importance, and other compassing weight'
had always been celebrated, but an agent with its own force'
and power that requests to be integrated in some ways'
into the political domain.
Facing Gaia is altogether different than facing Nature.'
How to define the Planetary, if I use my little reckoning'
principle, detect the overlap of territory and subsistence?'
On the face of it, it should be a great solution'
to the radical homelessness suffered on the Planet Global.'
The human, now as big as the Earth,'
is easily superimposed to a planetary system'
of comparable size in such a way that all question of freedom,'
and governance, and representation are also'
a question of subsistence.
You depend on the whole planet, while the whole planet'
is reacting to your action.
And yet, there is no such overlap,'
for reasons that Chakrabarty has tried'
to disentangle since his first famous paper On Four Theses.'
A good locus from which to see this'
is to consider the great Anthropocene cry.'
As soon as the term "Anthropocene"'
was used in geology, climatology, biochemistry,'
and stratigraphy by natural scientists,'
it was immediately criticized by social scientists'
for its complete insensitivity to the complex history'
of human society.
There was, indeed, a re-materialization'
of condition of self-subsistence,'
and a welcome one, at that.
But everyone agreed that the Anthropos of the Anthropocene'
was too much of an abstraction to provide a real superposition'
of the legal and social questions of freedom'
and autonomy upon the earthly condition of subsistence,'
although it was better to live in the Anthropocene'
than suspended in mid-air, as in the Global,'
with an Earth Overshoot Day somewhere in March or May.'
The point was about that geologists and biochemists'
were not offering any view of an Earth'
that citizens and activists could recognize as their home.'
Although the principles of homelessness were tackled--'
there was now a material earth under the feet of people--'
those people had no abode where they'
could express their conditions in terms compatible with role'
of social justice.
Humans were mainly plugged in as a box in the model developed'
by earth system science in the Potsdam Institute or the IBGP'
or IPCC, a box just like the one for soil, vegetation, or ocean'
currents.
So in spite of Gaia's pull, Planetary Planet--"
my Planetary-- could be felt as another attempt'
at naturalizing social life, but for social scientists,'
at the end of the human world.
And that Planetary was seen as really'
the end of a human domination can'
be shown by looking at two other, darker bodies, which'
are coming frighteningly close to the planetary.'
Planets, the gravitational fields of which'
could engulf all the others, as in a replay of Lars Von Trier's"
"Melancholia."
"Melancholia," as you know, finished badly,'
if you have not seen the film.
If you have not seen the film, I'm sorry to spoil it."
The first of two dark planets to consider'
is the one I call "Escape."
Considering that it becomes barely thinkable to imagine'
any harmony between the resources'
necessary for subsistence and the exercise of freedom,'
some have concluded that the two main assumptions of modernism'
should be abandoned altogether.
Freedom is for the few, not for the many.'
Breaking from the limits of Nature'
is essential destiny of those few only.'
Hence, the name "Escape."
Let's forget about the universality"
of a modern dream, still entertained'
by people on Planet Global.
And let's accelerate the break away from early conditions."
If we wanted a simile of such a liftoff in addition'
to the picture of New York's Goldman Sachs tower"
I showed earlier, I think Elon Musk's red Telsa"
car sent in space would be a good signpost.'
Although it superficially resembles the modernist ideal'
of expanding in science ad infinitum,'
it's much more sinister.
As Musk himself recognized when he said of his enterprise,'
"It is silly, but it\'s fun."
To my ears, with what was supposed to be a joke,'
he broke any continuity with the former ideals of progress'
for all.
This is, indeed, another planet.
On Planet Escape, the plan is that it will soon'
be possible to download our mortal bodies into mixtures'
of robot DNA, clouds, AI--
lots of AI-- situated as far as possible'
from the humble and limited Earth.'
Technology, after all, it is transcendence.'
It needs no Earth, except as a provisional platform'
before new adventures begin.
On to Mars!
In case those accelerations evaporate as so much hype--'
if, for instance, terraforming of Mars'
takes more time than anticipated--'
it might be wise to buy a gated community or underground bunker'
somewhere, preferably, as this article shows, in New Zealand--'
a real material, well-protected terroir'
down on an old, already there former Earth.'
Wherever the gated community ends up'
being situated the great difference between the Global'
and Planet Escape is that there is no longer'
any project for the billions of humans who are explicitly now--'
explicitly now-- left behind, or to use'
this cruel but frank adjective, who have become supernumerary.'
It\'s an extraordinary word, "supernumerary."'
Civilization, in the sense of a project invented by liberals'
at the time of the English Revolution,'
is now abandoned for good.
The simple question remains, where,'
will all those supernumerary masses go,'
all those left behind?
There is no difficulty in finding where they are heading.'
It's in the news every morning, especially after Election Day."
When it's not in Brazil, it's in Hungary."
When it's not in Hungary, it's in Germany, or England,"
or France, or Italy, or Bavaria last Sunday.'
You name it.
And of course, it happens even here,'
in this benighted country of yours,'
that is made simultaneously great again,'
and if I'm allowed to say, much smaller."
Here, there is another planet.
Let\'s call it "Identity."
That is, actually, the biggest planet'
of all, the one that over-shadows, it seems,'
all the others.
Where do the millions of people go?'
In one direction and one only-- wherever'
they would like, so long as they remain behind walls.'
So they can retain at least one element of a former civilizing'
project--
protection and identity.
Although troubling for the inhabitants of the other world,'
the migration is perfectly reasonable.'
If prosperity and freedom are gone, and if it's impossible,"
as scientists insist, to connect prosperity and Earth condition'
together, then let's at least have an identity,"
a sense of belonging.
It doesn't solve a question of a superposition"
between subsistence, territory, and freedom.'
Maybe not.
But the promises of the global have been left aside anyway.'
Modernization is stuck.
Inequalities are growing every day.'
And to top it all, we have been betrayed'
by those, the inhabitants of escape,'
who are flying toward Mars without us--'
Mars or New Zealand, that is.
They don't even pretend to work for our benefit."
Noah's Ark is for them, not for us."
They abandoned us.
We abandon them.
The avant-garde has been left to hang out by itself.'
No one follows them anymore.
And you might feel this anti-gravitational pull here'
in Cambridge.
The leaders don't lead any more.
We have all been replaced by others.'
planet Identity's attraction seems to be overwhelming."
Everybody dreams of being inside a new national or new'
local bounded space, even though it'
might mean abandoning any pretense'
at maintaining the civilizing project of the recent past.'
On Planet Global, there was, remember,'
a fundamental disconnect between the legal border'
and the real territory.
We had to come in, in order to subsist.'
But the horizon remained global, and the ideal'
was still that of coordination and shared sovereignty.'
They were in an awkward position,'
to be sure, but sort of cantilevered'
on top of an abyss.
But we had, at least, the project of coping with it.'
And of course, the best example of such intervention'
is the hapless, but still admirably fought of the Climate'
Conferences, the famous COP, culminating in the Paris'
Agreement in December 2015.
But on Planet Identity, as well as on Planet Escape,'
there is no need for such a horizon,'
as we know from the decision of the present administration'
to withdraw from the Paris Agreement.'
Climate deniers consubstantive to this project.'
Those who criticize modernity are'
going to regret it when considering'
the ravages committed by that long withdrawal'
inside the walls of identity.
While on Escape, it's technology that"
is supposed to be the saving hand of God.'
On Identity, there is not even that hope.'
Actually, hope is no longer a possibility.'
You cannot even say there, "It\'s silly, but it\'s fun."'
Above all other attitudes, it's rage and despair"
that I value most, which makes sense,'
since homelessness is pushed to its most extreme expression.'
The desperate effort to possess an identity,'
but without any realist material ground'
to settle on and provide with soil.'
Populists are people, yes, but without land.'
If I leave off here the guided tour'
for my fictional planetarium, chances'
that you are going to witness to the same roaring'
scene as in "Melancholia--" planets'
crashing into one another.
But fortunately-- don't despair--"
there are three other planets, the complex interferences'
of which are making themselves felt in addition to before.'
Of course, just like good planets do in our Solar System,'
they all act on one another.
So every one of our issues today,'
no matter if we wish to build something,'
or design an institution, or make any plan,'
settle any controversy, it's pushed and pulled,"
divided and influenced by the overlapping, contradictory,'
and still-unsettled fields of attraction of those seven'
bodies--
four that I've described.
There's three that I'd like to turn to."
Right now, the probability they will'
coalesce to make one common world is nil--'
and I would say fortunately, because the largest of all,'
Identity, is probably the darkest and least promising'
one to unify the political situation.'
So what are the others?
Planet World is still influential.'
By this label, I mean what has been'
the project of valued civilization, mainly Europe,'
but toward China, India, to project their own boundaries'
on to those of the others.
The result of those many and contradictory'
globalizations deserve the name "world--" not terribly good--'
because they are all meant to add to their own borders'
those of their legal expression of freedom and autonomy,'
a vastly greater expanse of people, lands, mores,'
resources, and good, which is simultaneously integrated--'
of course, scientific knowledge is a good example--'
and maintain outside as foreign an exterior.'
For Europeans, at least, it could'
be called the Planet Galileo or Descartes'
to mark more clearly a change in the very composition'
of the material with which the body of a planet is being made,'
and the new position in relation to the Sun.'
A type of worldling that was not so detectable'
before, what is called, in quotation'
marks, the Age of Discovery or with even more scare quotes,'
the Scientific Revolution--
a fabulous expansion of the world,'
but without any similar expansion'
of the feeling of identity, hence'
the strange creation or otherness'
which has been always co-evolving'
with the sentiment of modernity.
The predicament of those who have never been modern,'
this has transformed the others into others.'
You could object that this is, then, exactly the same planet'
as the Global, with its growing cantilever'
or disconnect between the legal and belief territory.'
But this would be to confuse the Earth before'
and after the main event, that is,'
the introduction of carbon--
coals and colonies, to use Pomeranz' expression again."
What is becoming clear and clear to the historian,'
viewed from a Planetary's point of view,"
is that there's not much continuity between the first"
and the second modernizing project,'
let's say between the 6th, 7th, 6, 18, and then 19 and 20,"
with coal and oil.
The asymmetries in power between discovering and discovered'
people were important before, but surmountable'
compared to those of a second period where'
any encounter ran the risk of annihilation'
for the discovered.
Inhabitants of a planet world were pilfering other society,'
yes.
But you could not portray them in the new one,'
as agent of a six extension.
To use Timothy Mitchell's expression,"
they could not render the link to the Earth invisible.'
On the contrary, they entrench more and more'
the notion of development and civilization'
within a newly material and complex world they're"
delighted in figuring out.
Economics were still not of dealing'
with prudence and limits, not yet what could render invisible'
the condition of subsistence and infinite profit, which'
is Mitchell's argument, as you know, in Carbon Democracy."
It's carbon that has transformed what"
was a strike of chance, a lucky mood, basically,'
into a destiny.
Without carbon, Europe's expansion"
was an intrusion, yes, complicating'
the ways of life of all sorts of other empires,'
as post-colonial studies have so elegantly shown.'
But with carbon, it became, to use [inaudible] term,'
an apocalypse of civilization.
Although world seems a slightly weakened, outdated,'
backward version of a Global and of a Planetary,'
the same cannot be said about what I've called in Down"
to Earth "the Terrestrial."
The Terrestrial is at once that toward which'
it seems that all progressive political movements are'
heading.
And yet-- this is funny--
what is terribly difficult to define.'
Mann and Wainwright, the guys I mentioned earlier, call it "X."'
Lantern and I, in a recent paper in "Science",'
called it Gaia 2.0.
Anna Tsing called it "living in ruins of capitalism."'
And Chakrabarty, after all these years,'
is still struggling to give it a name.'
Paradoxically, the main attractor'
does not seem to be so attractive.'
And yet, using the same grid as for the other planets,'
it seems to offer, finally, some sort'
of a solution to the homelessness'
detected as the source of a general disorientation.'
It overlays the strange shape of territory-- and remember,'
territory is whatever life form, the source for any lifeform'
whatever, as far as we know it, as it'
is, that allows it to subsist.
Atop a territory, understood as what free agent'
can decide on their own.
If Anna Tsing's book takes on more and more importance,"
it's because it's probably the first to show,"
in enough detail, how such superposition is possible,'
even though "mushrooms at the end of a world"'
fits none of the earlier categories of nation-state,'
sovereignty, capitalism, class struggle,'
but renew all of those terms.
Why would it be different, then, from the Planetary'
whose presence and influence has been growing since the 1960s?'
Precisely because it might offer a solution'
to the great Anthropocene cry I mentioned earlier.'
You cannot insert into politics any sort of natural entity'
without transforming the search for freedom and autonomy'
into the simple domination of necessity and heteronomy.'
I know.
I've tried everything for 40 years."
It never works, believe me.
So to tell humans that they behave just'
like a geological force, as the Committee for the Anthropocene'
does so regularly and beautifully--'
and even though it's technically true--"
the scales are correct, the influence'
is indisputable, the effect devastating--'
it's not something that any political agent"
can hear, without ceasing to be a human political agent.'
In becoming geology, it's impossible."
Anthropocenic-- can we say that, Anthropocenic human--'
have become as immobile and as paralysed'
eyes as statues of salt.
But where did we learn that freedom was'
reserved to human lifeforms?
Where did we learn that freedom was'
reserved to human lifeforms.
This is where the discovery of Lovelock and Margulis' Gaia"
comes in.
And we wrote a series of papers with Linton.'
I don't have time to get into it."
Gaia is not of system science.
It's a much more interesting and astute sort of being."
I've no room to develop, unfortunately, the idea fully,"
but the key element we need here is the knowledge'
that all lifeforms have in common'
that they make up their own laws.'
They make up their own laws.
They don't obey rules made as [inaudible].."
The key discovery of Lovelock and Margulis'
is that lifeforms don't reside in space and time,"
but that time and space is the result'
of their own entanglement.
So although reconciling the realm of necessity'
and that of freedom is a waste of time,'
connecting free agent with free agent'
opens up completely different styles of association,'
and allows the building of different societies.'
Basically, the terrestrial is the same body as the Planetary,'
but wherever politicization of Nature has finally taken over.'
So it's a very important shift.
If I'm slightly confident in the gravitational pull"
of the sixth planet--
slightly, very slightly-- it's for a reason that is not"
visible until you bring all of them together in a spatial--'
spatial is a word impossible to say for a Frenchman-- spatial'
like space, spatial consideration,'
just as fictional as the rest, of course.'
But after all, it does not function'
what is needed at this moment to focus our attention.'
It's a nice diagram, isn't it?
In this diagram, done by Alexandra [inaudible],,'
you will notice that the Terrestrial'
is pulled toward the gravitational field'
of a seventh planet I've not mentioned yet,"
and that I\'m strongly tempted to call "Contemporary."'
Why do I name it that way?
Why do I end up with it, although it's also clear"
that it should have been the first to consider?'
Precisely because it has never been'
allowed to be freed from the retrospective judgment'
of the five other planets.
Whenever it's treated first, it becomes primitive."
Wherever people talk about modernity,'
they immediately equate, by contrast,'
a primeval site, that of archaic attachment to the soil,'
to the ground, which is either ridiculed'
as that out of which the whole civilizing trajectory'
as been extricating itself, so to speak,'
or, what is even worse, it's celebrated as being"
a mythical archaic primordial autochthonous'
Ur-Earth, freed from all the tragic sins'
of civilized humans.
Remember Husserl with the Earth that doesn't move,"
Heidegger with the lived Earth?
If there's one lesson to draw from the extraordinary rebirth"
of anthropology in recent times, it's"
that, for probably the first time in anthropology'
for 200 years--
probably because of the symmetric pull'
of the Terrestrial, actually--
the many societies of human and non-human that are active'
on the Earth are allowed to stop having to define themselves'
by comparison with modernity, or to be taken only as having rich'
symbolic views of Nature, which what has been called,'
probably misleadingly, the "ontological turn,"'
they are free at last to be our contemporaries--'
difficult to pronounce.
Maybe I should find another name for it.'
Contemporaries-- "modern" looks better,'
but contemporaries is better--
and maybe also to extend some of the recipes we'
might have for composing societies made of free agents.'
As Viveiros de Castro is fond of saying, what is sure'
is that both societies of human and non-human'
are expert at survival.
And now, they are their own planet.'
And they can fight back.
It's about time we move from modernity to contemporaneity--"
that is, to the present.
Let me now conclude the tour guide'
on my fictional planetarium with three very short remarks.'
The first is that there is not, as you'
see here, one, but three or four different arcs of history.'
And modernity, modernity is really very'
small, probably something-- see, it's a very short movement."
Already here, it becomes--
begins to turn.
And then "chook," and then "chook."'
And then here, the attraction pull, and then here.'
So there are many different arcs.'
So we are getting weight of modernity, which is--'
I mean, for architect as well for philosopher,'
it would be so good.
Modernism appears now as a small parenthesis that'
went from world to global, and which is now torn apart'
by two radically different gravitational pulls,'
one by what I've called the Dark Planets, Escape and Identity--"
even though they have the majority, of course--'
and the other by those who are rematerializing'
the Earth in different but complimentary fashion, namely'
Planetary and Terrestrial.
Architects and designers, I'm sure,"
may now understand that to having'
a project of designing for the planet should'
be added some qualification--
yes, but for which planet?
The second remark is that it's no wonder that we"
feel politically disoriented.
Those seven planets make their influence felt at the same time'
over every one of us, and modify the path of our enterprise'
minute by minute.
We are not divided in two--
forward or backward-- but at least in seven.'
Every time we choose a course of action, utter an opinion,'
we feel engaged or repulsed by the weight of those bodies.'
Every act, no matter how simple, has become contentious.'
The third and final remark is that if my geopolitics map is'
even vaguely coherent, it should be clear'
that there is a general movement not to go back to the past.'
Moving forward or backward was a typically modernist conceit'
during this short moment here, segment.'
But we move, I think--
I don't know how you architects, you're"
always very good at capturing this sort of mood or style--'
we move from more outside or more inside.'
There is a sort of insiderness that is making itself felt.'
And that is visible in science as well, I think,'
as in the art, and what I pursue in serving my project.'
And this is a bit of publicity for what I'm"
doing next week in New York.
Well that's the end.
Thank you much.
[applause]
So hopefully, we can have some questions.'
One thing, I think there are some mics,'
so maybe people can raise their hands, and we can--'
one thing, Bruno, is that in architecture'
and in design schools, the word "contemporary" is very common.'
And "contemporaneity" is very common.'
OK, my fault.
Which is very interesting, no, because I'
think that their struggle is not the struggle of overcoming'
modernity, but it's really the struggle"
of addressing the questions of the contemporary'
or the questions of contemporaneity'
in a way that addresses the question of spatial.'
But the spatial in a way that is not just about space, but it's"
about the relationality of spatial'
in a way that entangles those who are also'
engaged in it, so the user or the participant or something'
like this.
So that question of contemporaneity'
with the spatial also exists at multiple scales,'
because we are designing, let's say a room or a house."
And we have to think about the specificity'
of that particular moment.
But we are also thinking about the scalar condition'
of the spatial, where the thing that we're working on-- whether"
it's a house, or a landscape, or a part of a city--"
also exists as an exemplar of a bigger project.'
Therefore, the thing is also indicative of a bigger project'
of a responsibility, which is larger than the specific thing'
that we are working on.
So I think that question of the sort of the scalar'
is also something interesting.
And one thing that I didn't say is that you, as is evident--"
it's a pity that the diagram has disappeared--"
but you constantly work with visual material.'
You work with exhibitions.
And you've been using exhibitions"
in a way to also promote the kind of ideas that you have.'
So one thing that would be interesting'
is really for us to also now try to get to--'
which is wonderful.
I mean, it was really great to hear this kind of description'
of conditions, to the moment when'
one can also construct a certain set of conditions in response.'
So that we are not escaping.
We are not moderns.
And therefore, somewhere around this space'
of the Terrestrial to the Contemporary,'
there is also a project.
There is something, presumably, that is made.'
Right?
[laughs]
And how is that?
For us, it's not so funny.
We have to do this constantly.
So--
I guess your life is complicated,'
because if you have a project here, it's"
pulled and pushed by all of these things in between.'
Exactly.
But this is also part of the project of design.'
So design has to negotiate with this.'
So there was some relation with what I said--'
So I'm trying to.
Yeah, there is some relation to design.'
But I want to ask you about the word "melancholy,"'
because in the way that you refer to the movie,'
the word "melancholy" is a condition of sadness purely.'
And it's the bad end.
But also, melancholia has been used'
as a specially induced condition which can be very productive--'
melancholia as a mode of reflection,'
as a way of producing a kind of project.'
Do you feel that there is a possibility for melancholia'
to also provide some kind of a space of projection,'
or a space of sort of thinking, that'
provides at least temporal--
not solution, but temporal suggestions,'
recommendations for the Contemporary'
to exist in different ways?
Or how would you--
how would you construct the sort of project'
beyond the Contemporary?
How to construct a project, I don't know."
But there is this word by a psychiatrist from Australia'
called solastalgia, which is close to--'
but it's a specific condition that this guy in Australia"
found.
And Australia, as you know, is destroyed'
by ecological transformation, and doesn't pay any attention"
to it, which is precisely the feeling of hopelessness'
at home, the feeling that the Earth is actually'
disappearing under your feet, and that you are paralyzed.'
So just my very simple scheme--
I mean, homelessness is a very old and very traditional'
question of cultural ideas, just like melancholia.'
But there's something specific if my argument"
that all politics is linked to this question'
of a new climatic regime is visible.'
So that's what I say.
So all of this question about project,'
about multiplicity of positions to take simultaneously into'
account-- this is as old as building anything.'
But what is new is this situation'
that we now disagree, even on the common world'
in which all of these projects are taking place.'
We disagree-- we don't disagree inside space and time."
We disagree about space and time.'
And it's different if a Planetary, which"
is all the sort of big ESS science of system science'
is also different from the terrestrial.'
It's also different from that.
This is just a dispute which is simultaneously'
inside the science, inside our own psychological makeup.'
And that's where the solastalgia can get in,"
and which produces what I call wicked universality, which'
is basically, we talk now to people who'
have lost their land in a way--
those that are losing the land and move, and those that'
come inside.
This is very important for Europeans, as you know,'
because of the migration crisis.
And they talk to people inside France, Germany, Bavaria, et'
cetera, who feel also that the Earth is also moving.'
And that's a new situation which is much more tense because"
of a Planet Identity, which is a general movement everywhere'
simultaneously in the world, from Indonesia to Brazil,'
which--
I mean, there's a massive phenomenon here,"
which is so important for geopolitics'
and political science, which is all'
of the leaders in all of these nation-states'
have been eliminated.
Why?
I mean, what's happening?
I mean, the drag before--
no, the pull, the push or pull, the drag, the pull,'
the pull of a global horizon had hidden all of this division.'
But now that the pull is no longer there,'
then no one leads anymore.
So I'm trying just to make sense of what"
does the new climatic regime do to sort of old questions,'
basically, so including, of course,'
melancholia and all of these traditional questions of design'
probably are influenced by it.
I mean, it's a very simple argument."
It's not that simple.
Even if it looks a bit strange, it is a simple argument.'
Don't you feel this homelessness?"
Of course, this homelessness is very general,'
but a specific type of homelessness.'
If you read, last week, IPCC Report--'
do something, 1.5 degree.
Two weeks before, it was 15,000 scientists'
saying it's soon too late.
One month before, it was 30% of the species are going--'
of the insect species, have disappeared, of birds, sorry,'
and so on, and so forth.
What does all of this news do to the psychological makeup'
of people?
This is what this diagram is about.'
My argument is that even if you are a denier or indifferent,'
it eats your brain and your heart.'
And it does something which explains, for me,'
a brutalization of politics, because you cannot possibly'
understand how you can do anything,'
nor can you relate to this news, which non-philosopher'
scientists are producing.
Denial and skepticism is just one version of it.'
I mean, it's a simple version, which is, in a way,"
very understandable.
But it has something more psychosocial in it.'
And that's what I tried to capture,"
even though it's not my discipline."
I'm sure I'd like to give a chance to other people."
Please, go ahead.
Thank you for once again reminding us'
of the continuing importance of semiotics in science,'
both with regard to what science operates upon'
and what it produces in terms of contemporary culture.'
I am astonished, though, that your fictional representation,'
your planetarium of things contemporary,'
should be connected to a climatic outcome'
that you describe as a "climatic regime," as a thing.'
Because the problem with climate models, as with all models,'
is that they are not things.
They are not what?
They are not things.
They are metaphysical representations'
of what one hopes is reality.
As someone who publishes in climate science journals,'
I'm acutely aware of this, and acutely disturbed,"
that one should elide the political project, which'
has been ongoing for over a generation, since Earth Day,'
with the actual state of the art or the lack of it'
in the models that to which we attribute'
to the future condition of the world.'
Thank you.
Well, you are then on planet--
where are you, then, Escape?
No.
The planet where the climate--
I'm Planet Complexity.
Yes, OK, well--
OK.
But the whole argument is based on the idea'
that there is something about a new climatic regime which'
does make--
you notice that I use "new climatic regime."'
I don\'t use "Anthropocene" so much,'
because precisely Anthropocene would lead us'
into the stabilization of all these models, which are always'
models, as you say.
But new climatic regime is a word'
which is much more closer from law and politics,'
like "new regime--" that is for Frenchmen, old regime,'
new regime, it means something.
So this is why I use this expression.'
It does something to the way we organize our politics.'
And it was-- this is why Rich is interesting,'
because it was seen immediately by the Reagan administration.'
They immediately saw the relevance,'
even though 30 years ago, it was not as certain as it is now.'
And they immediately linked into it.'
The head of-- I forget the name of the head of--'
I don't know what Peter thinks of this article."
But it was an interesting thing.
Immediately, the core evolution of denial and certainty,'
they grow together.
The more you are certain, the more you deny.'
That's an interesting phenomenon for science relation."
Can you talk a little bit just about the diagram,'
and the necessity of separation versus the relationality'
of the elements to each other?
Can you switch it off?
Because I don't want to have to answer this question, because--"
You don't?
OK, Peter, you ask the question.
No, but I think it's interesting that within the worldly, which"
is contemporary--
That's the problem with talking with an architect"
and a designer.
You have identity and escape simultaneously,'
and you don't necessarily always have them."
So the proximity--
No, no, we are always planet--
every one of us, we are always Planet Simultaneously,'
of course, I'm sorry to say.
No.
Well, sorry, he took it seriously.'
We want it back.
No, the only thing I would keep from the diagrams'
is the interesting curve.
Because what I'm trying to interest you, architect, to be"
inside the net.
You see, is it's not forward or backward, or inside or outside."
I mean, what happened was with the pull to be inside,'
which is one very interesting thing'
I'm doing with scientists now, working"
on what I call "critical zone."
I'm doing an exhibition on that, actually."
And I'm interested in developing, if any one of you"
had an idea, a link with what you would call "landscape"'
and what those scientists call "critical zone," which'
is an interesting interface I'm trying to develop."
Anyway.
Bruno's looking for volunteers.
So there's somebody here.
So one of the things that strikes me about the diagram'
is that it's all circles and spirals,"
except for the terrestrial--
that there is a way in which something happens'
at the open-ended question mark-headed arrow that'
leads through the terrestrial.
And the terrestrial has a kind of superposition'
of a cross-section of the Earth, maybe,'
and a Mondrian painting, a kind of "Broadway Boogie Woogie."'
And then that put me in mind of thinking'
of the planets, the planet of the sprawl, of the urban'
in a transnational way, in which we have all these connections'
with airplanes and trains between cities.'
And the great opposition that we feel,'
which is astonishing to me at this late date,'
between the rural and the urban, that we'
feel so strongly in France, in Germany, in Brexit,'
in Trump's election, I mean, constantly"
this sense of the cities form a kind of planet that exists--'
Themselves, yeah.
--that is being rejected hugely outside of the cities,'
and contested in the suburban regimes that surround them.'
And I wondered, in thinking about this moment'
of [inaudible] saying ruins of our own societies that you put'
up late in the talk as you came to the terrestrial,'
and how you think about this overlay in the Gaia world'
of the built environment in there, sort of the world of a--'
of a constructed world inside this very thin,'
this razor-thin layer of Gaia.
It's an artifact, actually, of Alexandra."
Alexandra wrote a paper with me.
I mean, she\'s the first author in "Anthropocene Review"'
on Gaiagraphy, which is this--
so she took it--
it's actually very clever, but of course, it's invisible here,"
inversion of the notion of a planet.'
So she reused that.
I mean, it's completely opaque in this diagram."
I'm really sorry, so it ends up as a square."
But it's actually a very--
now I feel in what you said another question, which is,'
of course, those three, actually,'
are, of course, half cities, technospheres--'
I mean, completely abandoning the position between land and--'
but with land, I was talking about the soil.'
I was mentioning the Earth.
We don't have the right word.
Of course, all of those are, I mean, concepts.'
I mean, they are very important concepts.'
It is very difficult, actually-- this is a whole part of it--'
to represent something which is realistically'
what is the subsistence condition of the people today.'
And that's the source of this orientation"
in my little argument there.
And the disorientation is bigger every day,'
when we learn about what the scientists are telling us.'
Please, go ahead.
Hi.
Thank you.
The title of your talk reminds of a quote by one'
of your peers--
"There is no world, only islands,"'
which seems to underscore--
There is no world, only what?
There is no world, only islands.
Only ions.
Ions?
Islands.
Islands.
Islands.
Islands, oh, sorry.
I'm sorry.
So there is no world, only islands,'
which seems to underscore the impossibility'
for a common ground, which is what characterizes'
post-modern thinking.
In the wake of 2008, the crash--
Who is my peer here?
I didn't get--
Jacques Derrida.
Ah, OK.
Very honored to be a peer of Jacques Derrida.'
In the wake of the crisis, scholars'
concerned with post-capitalism beyond capitalism'
identified the political problem of one no, but many yeses.'
A new generation of scholars, dissatisfied with this aspect'
of post-modern thinking--
Sorry, but is there a question?
Yes, so the question--
Could you just ask it as a question, though?'
The question is--
Because he needs to follow.
Yes, the question is if you could elaborate'
on the idea of universalism, which you briefly touched upon'
during your lecture.
Well, one of the--
I mean I don't know if we can go very far in this very"
strange planetology.
But of course, one of them is that everyone'
has a different metrics.
This is what he alluded to in the beginning.'
I mean, the metric is very, very different in each of them.'
And the other thing is, of course, the notion'
of universality is different.
But the way I used the word "wicked universality"'
is precisely inside this argument,'
that the sharing is not--
we have the same common world.
We will find the solution to climate change'
and to all the other things, because we have'
the same set of principles.
And we have problems, then we have a solution,'
because it's a common one.
If this is universality, then it's gone on the island"
that you mentioned.
But there is a wicked [inaudible] back in,'
so to speak.
And I'm doing an exhibit now on that precise question,"
which is, Tsing's argument.
We collaborate on this new ground,'
literally, which is you lost your ground.'
We lost our ground.
How do you do it?
How do we do it?
And that's where opening another--"
I mean, "universality" is a very different term,'
except we share the diplomatic--
I've tried to define the word diplomacy in anthropology"
around that.
It's a diplomatic encounter of people"
who have lost their land, because many of these,'
apart from the two last ones, I mean, all of them'
have lost their land.
It's complete asymmetry or cantilever between the two."
So it's an open space of discussion, and rituals,"
and all sort of things to be invented,'
and for which there are, as you know,'
many artists working on that, which'
is, how do we share the condition of having'
lost the land?
And trying not to be all in the Identity Planet?'
This is really-- if we are not able to find ways'
to talk to the people who are massively migrating'
to identity, what we do, especially in universities,'
is just wasted, so to speak.
So this is why it's so important to really find a way to share."
You lost your mind and your land.'
We do it, too.
OK, now how do we build from that?'
Something-- actually, you mentioned Derrida.'
The whole reflection of Derrida on Algeria,'
its past, et cetera, could resonate with this,'
if you are interested.
I don't know what Derrida would have"
done with the new climatic regime, actually.'
It would be interesting.
We'll come to you.
One second.
Thank you very much.
I'm looking at the orrery model, kind"
of the series of spatial bodies that are agglomerated'
in their relations.
And there's a few things that I've been thinking of."
One is that some now seem to be qualified spatially,'
and others are yet waiting for a spatial reference,'
although maybe that's embedded in the way you've"
presented them.
So maybe the Escape being that space capsule,'
or the thing that leaves the main body ejected outside,'
because I'm a bit--
I feel that the words "Global," "Planetary" and "Terrestrial"'
have a strong geographic or spatial imaginary,'
and Escape, Identity, and Contemporary'
are still waiting for them to have'
a kind of a clearer, and maybe spatial reference, a body'
that we can imagine.
Is it an island?
Is it a satellite?
Is it a capsule, the thing that leaves or the thing'
that rotates?
But what I feel is that there is that void that the blue marble'
image has left for us, as that fixation of an image of that'
which brings us, that synthetic image, and the desire to fill'
that void with some reference.
So you mentioned the Earth a few times in that conversation,'
and the title of your recent book'
is Down to Earth or [inaudible].
And it seems somehow that after the Terrestrial,'
the Earth leaves the picture, but the Contemporary stays.'
So one question is, on these bodies,'
where's the Earth if it is any of these spatial references?"
The other is the incentive you, the invitation you,'
the underlying invitation that there is a--'
the shift to the terrestrial requires the politicization'
of Nature as one that has taken over.'
And I'm wondering what acts, what"
are possible routes, invitation, what is the arrow?'
What is the?
What is the arrow?
What is the actual force?
What is the action that can allow'
us to move from one spatial body to a next one?'
What could be possible actions that allow that politicization'
of Nature to take over?
How can we-- I mean, if the image of the revolution'
is not any more the one, or the march,'
or the writing, or the drawing, or the speaking, or-- you know,'
you point to the void that the intellectual has.'
What are the actions that could allow us to shift the forces?'
Hold that thought, and I get one more question,'
and then you answer both at the same time?'
Do you think you can do that?
I'm in your hands.
I do whatever.
And especially [inaudible] is complicated,'
so if I can get out of that one, I will be a happy man.'
This is two questions, that's why."
Well, I hope I can help you.
I think my question does overlap a little with--'
Then answer her.
--that complex one.
It would be great if you could answer her.'
But I - maybe this will be an escape hatch--'
I really loved your mapping, your descriptions.'
All those worlds had that great satisfying click'
of recognizability.
But except for Identity.
And I felt, because I live on and off in France,'
and I felt there was something really,'
really French about your sense of identity'
as a kind of enclosed consciousness of rage'
and despair.
I have this argument all the time'
when I'm in France with people.
In the United States, it is often a very, very--'
the word has very different connotations of community.'
OK, just hold on.
Let me just finish.
So of community, which is something'
which is agential, and can often produce changes'
that are beneficial.
We are all sitting here hoping that certain communities are'
going to at least prevent the deepening hold of fascism'
over our government.
Maybe we're crazy to, but I just wonder"
if you have thought through your world Identity'
in terms of how that concept works'
in places besides la Republic.
Now, I understand that.
And if you could help me understand it better.'
Well, I'm a bit French, so [inaudible].."
But you're talking in universals."
And also because I think you're perfectly right."
I should drop identity, actually, completely.'
Because I tried precisely to avoid'
the word which would be accusatory in any sense,'
like populism, and so on.
And identity-- you're right.
Well, it becomes community, then we'
talk about something completely different.'
But I'm aware, now that you say it,"
that I projected some French things there,'
and also because the tragedy in Europe, maybe, is more tense.'
Well, actually, it's tense here, too."
But I think, madam, you're perfectly right."
So I will drop Identity immediately from revision.'
But I need a better term.
So I mean--
Nationalism.
No, because neo-national, neo--
we want to keep this word positive.'
Because I mean, escape, I don't try to be-- because I mean,"
I can't be fair with these guys, but the acceleration"
is of the one who simultaneously go to Mars and to New Zealand.'
I mean, it's--
I can't.
But identity, OK.
We'll discuss it.
So what about the Earth?
Well, the Earth is the term which'
would have been unifying the whole thing when'
we had a common world, which we no longer have.'
So that's the environment, which is, of course,"
every one of these planets or representations'
had a view of the Earth as common.'
But we are several, so it's gone."
It's gone.
It's gone.
It's up in the diplomatic space, but it's gone in the sense"
that if you begin--
I mean, this gentleman, the first question, obviously,'
is on a word in which the models of the climate'
is not the big question.
So what it is to be in a situation'
where what is the main conditions'
of the temperature of the modernist project'
is not unifiable.
And you cannot play, again, the goal of saying, well,'
this is just archaic and obscurantist and anti-science,'
because it's inside science.
The IPCC Report of two weeks ago is inside the sciences.'
And we are the people who say, no.'
So the whole link, also, between the state,'
scientific authority, leadership, vanguard,'
all of that has been sort of broken.'
So it's very difficult now to say, well, the Earth is this"
or the Earth is that.
And yet, every day in a newspaper,'
scientific or otherwise, you get news'
that it's going to be too late.
It's going to be too late.
It's going to be too late.
It's going to be too late.
And we stay on our butt, with this extraordinary decision.'
But it's not a big deal.
I mean, it is solvable.
It's not an enormous thing.
But it is a decision not to act.
And this is something which breaks down'
the unity of the-- of course, the unity was, of course,'
fictional, but the apparent unity'
of the current world, in which everybody'
would have the same space.
And then we would find solutions, basically problem'
solving.
But you wrote a whole book on this question, actually,'
and which has a stylistic--
one would have this title.
We need not one book, but we need seven.'
It will be interesting to see, actually, stylistic difference.'
And Alexandra is a bit working on that.'
She's actually now in an architectural school"
in Manchester, with Albena Yaneva.'
And she's doing a PhD on this question"
of representation of Gaia.
So there's hope for architects.
As long as there's hope for philosophy, I'm sure"
there will be hope for architecture, too.'
Well, no philosopher would [inaudible] that philosophy.'
But Bruno--
You have to be French to do [inaudible]..'
By the way, one word that's used in the context"
of the university, in lieu of "identity" is "belonging."'
Belonging, you need the soil.
I know, but belonging is not necessarily--'
no, no, it's not only referring to the soil."
Belonging also belonging to a community,'
a group, which is part of, not dissimilar to identity.'
It's not belonging to that ground."
It's belonging in terms of--
You need the ground to have belonging, no?'
Not necessarily.
Belonging is also in terms of affiliation, associations,'
things like that.
But we can discuss it later on.
Anyway, thank you, Bruno.
Thank you all very much for coming.'
[applause]
