Good evening.
OK, I've waited for the GSD time."
It's 6:37, so we can start now.
So I am here to welcome a creative powerhouse,'
spirited breaker of rules, and a vocal advocate of equality.'
That's how the jury praised Odile Decq in 2016"
when she won the Jane Drew Prize for women in architecture.'
It's an extremely important prize."
Previous winners, just to give you an idea, had--'
the previous winners just before her'
had been Grafton Architects and just before that, Zaha Hadid.'
So it's a very important moment.
And I like this advocate of equality.'
The jury also pointed out that a survey done just the year'
before in 2015--
a worldwide survey of over 1,000 women--'
revealed that 72% had experienced discrimination'
or harassment within architecture.'
Within the profession of architecture.'
And the numbers are not going down.'
They're going up.
The breaker of rules part--
so we need an advocate.
The breaker of rules part, it seems,'
started young, as a child.
This is a story I read.
I read that when you told your father'
you wanted to be an architect, he said, non, c'est impossible."
He said girls don't become architects."
This patriarchal opposition she would'
convert later into a more systematic resistance'
through architecture itself.
If my calculation of the numbers are correct,'
Odile would have witnessed the events of May 1968,'
but as a pre-teen.
No?
Not even.
Not even born.
OK.
But maybe then the consequences--'
the consequences of some of the May 1968 events'
were that the Ecole des Beaux Arts'
was dispersed in pedagogic units across Paris.'
She did attend UP-6, the one in La Villette.'
And, again, I get them mixed up.
But some of them were so radical that they hardly held classes.'
I don't know if UP-6 was--
that Pedagogical Unit 6 was one of these.'
And, subsequently, she studied urbanism at Sciences Po.'
But that's old history.
It was really in London, in the 1980s,'
that she came to her own, let's say, in architecture."
She founded her studio in 1978 in London at first--'
in Paris.
In Paris.
And then, by the 1990s, the work had exploded.'
And that's when Odile Decq became Odile Decq."
For the work in the '90s, she won the Golden Lion in Venice"
in 1996.
After the turn of the Millennium,'
the work-- the projects-- got larger,'
the work got more diverse.
It also got more international.
She now has projects in China, in Italy,'
some of the recent projects.
But the new millennium also produced a new desire--'
pedagogy.
Odile founded her own international school in Lyon'
in 2007.
It opened in 2014.
It's experimental.
It's transdisciplinary.
I was with her this afternoon in a review,'
and we are getting some of that pedagogy here in--'
that experimental pedagogy in her studio.'
The school is called Confluence--'
sorry, Confluence Institute for Innovation'
and Creative Strategies in Architecture.'
And the school, as I understand it, like the architect,'
aims to disrupt.
Original, radical, rule-breaking--'
I witnessed it today--
a generous advocate.
We need more architects like her, and we welcome her.'
Thanks for that, Michael.
What a generous presentation.
So, yes, first of all, I have to say'
that I'm very glad to be in the GSD,"
because I am experimenting-- my first time teaching here,'
my first time lecturing here.
So, everything is first time for me.'
And I'm glad to do that.
And I find the atmosphere of this school very cool.'
You know?
I love the atmosphere of this school.'
I don't know why, but you are very unique."
You have-- it's such a privilege to learn"
and to be in such a space.
This is fantastic, and the atmosphere is very nice.'
So thank you, Michael, to invite me to come.'
I'm very glad.
So my title is "Architecture Thinking."'
Why?
Because, as many people from some years now,'
I was talking before about design thinking.'
You know what is design thinking.'
Everybody was talking about design thinking.'
And so I was using that too.
And after two, three years, I was thinking,'
why saying only design?
Why not talking about architecture?'
Because I strongly believe that architecture'
is much more powerful than only design.'
Because if you think about--
because it is unique.
Architecture is a really unique field, a unique discipline,'
a culture on itself.
And with architecture, we can help the world.'
We can because we are problem solvers.'
We are people unique.
Why?
Because when you are facing a problem--'
a question-- in architecture, whatever the question is,'
we have to convoke all the disciplines.'
We have to convoke art, philosophy, history,'
architecture, geography, geology, sociology, whatever.'
Regulation, everything.
We have to convoke everything to understand the complexity'
and to work and to analyze this complex situation.'
And from that, we have to be able to make a proposal-- first'
to do a diagnosis and to make a proposal.'
And this proposal has to be able to work'
from a very little scale to the bigger one-- to the larger one.'
And this is a unique attitude, a unique culture,'
a unique discipline which is able to do that.'
So, thanks to that, we are unique.'
When you are studying architecture, this is unique.'
And if you apply-- if we apply that, not only'
being architects, but if we are applying'
that on many, many questions, many problems, we can help.'
We can make proposals.
We can propose something for the world.'
And we have to speak about architecture thinking'
to re-implant architecture as a central core in the world,'
because this is so important.
So, first of all, I want to show you some installations,'
because I'm applying architecture to many things."
So I do installations sometimes.
So the first one that I want to show you'
is one from 2004 at an artist's space in New York."
They asked me to come and to do something.'
And they said, you don't show architecture."
You are not presenting project.
I said, OK.
So I installed a little cabinet in that place'
which was a little corner in the space where--'
in that cabinet.
OK.
So in that cabinet.
The floor is not flat, is not horizontal.'
You have to enter with a ramp and the floor'
continues in ramp.
The cabinet itself has walls, but the walls are not vertical.'
They are sometimes-- they're all oblique."
Never vertical and not regular.
Some are painted in the white.
Some are covered with mirrors.
As soon as you enter in it, on the one, covered by painting,'
I projected images--
images of my project but it's not only architecture."
And because of the reflection into the mirror,'
you discover new spaces.
So space is changing.
The perception of the space is absolutely [inaudible]..'
So the space that you believe-- you see in between these two'
parts, the two sides of the image, is not existing,'
is the reflection of something else, which is on your back.'
And because you were on an oblique surface,'
you don't know where--
you don't process, in a way, the limit"
between the floors, the wall, there'
is a different wall in between them.'
So I called that in 2004 virtual space between real.'
Because you don't know what is this space and how it is."
And I like to play with that ambiguity of perception'
of the space.
In 2007, I was renovating an art gallery close to my office,'
and the man who is the owner of the gallery'
told me that I will be the first exhibiting in the gallery.'
I said, I am not an artist, I'm an architect."
He said, OK, but you will be the first one.'
So, I remembered, at this time, a little sketch'
that I was doing to some people in my office to explain what'
I call dynamic equilibrium.
Equilibrium could be reached with two columns and a beam.'
It's easy, it's simple, it's stable."
But I like when something is unstable, looks unstable.'
So when you have just one column,'
you have to estimate how to make equilibrium between two'
strengths, two forces.
So we built that with two balloons.'
One is a balloon of air, two meters diameter.'
And the other one is a balloon of-- it's"
just a bubble in aluminum filled with sand.'
And in between them, the beam that you see'
is 6 centimeters by 6 centimeters.'
It is 6 meters long.
And the column is 6 centimeter by 6 centimeter,'
one above the other without fixation.'
So we had to calculate with our engineers'
the precise position of this point where we'
install the beam on the column.
And we had to fill at the ends with sand, grain'
by grain, to reach equilibrium.
And when you were to feel the instability of this equilibrium'
by walking into the space, because the balloon'
of air is filling the space--
when you are walking on the side, the air is moving.'
So the balloon is moving a little bit.'
And you feel that this stability is nearly unstable.'
And I like this idea of being always unstable, always'
in movement.
In France, we have a garden festival every year,'
and there are thematics.
And in 2009, they announce the thematic of colors.'
And somebody in my office said, why not propose a black garden?'
I said, OK, why not a black garden?'
So we did then propose a black garden.'
We did the black installation, and we have been chosen.'
We have been selected.
And we built its [? sides ?] with sheets of glass--'
black glass-- and filling the floor with powder--'
tire powder.
Very thick.
15 centimeters thickness.
And in the middle, a little surface of water on a black'
surface.
To have a silentious garden.
Because the thematic of the garden, as I said,'
the official was colors.
So everybody all around were using multiple colors'
everywhere.
It was very noisy of colors.
And I wanted that in my garden, everybody was silentious.'
So because of this tire powder on the floor, when you come in,'
all the sound is absorbed.
If you come with somebody, you want to talk to him or her,'
and you can't listen, because all the sound was"
absorbed by the floor.
And so this is a very simple installation.'
But thanks to the sun, the impression--'
its sense of perception, because of the reflection,'
because of that loss of reflection in between them,'
between the reflections of the trees et cetera.'
So it was a place of silence and reflection.'
In SCI ARC in 2011, they asked me to do something'
in the exhibition room.
And when architects usually build an object,'
I created a new space.
And the space is very simple.
Four triangles equilateral.
But the walls are not vertical.
Everything inside is covered with mirrors.'
The space pass-- the passage between the spaces'
is not at the same place.
So when you come in, as you see from above,'
when you come in you see the object, which is inclined.'
And inside, you don't perceive what is the space."
You can't understand the space because, again,"
of the reflection.
You don't know where are the limits"
between the walls, the floor.
So, is it a door, a passage?
Or is it just a reflection of another one.'
Where are the passage?
So you have to play.
You enjoy being there, because you have to find your own way'
and you don't understand what is the size, the space--"
the form of the space.
And I love to play with that, as I said before.'
And in Milan, every year in the furniture fair,'
they ask in a university in the garden'
to architects, artists, and designers,'
to do something with a factory.
And they asked me to work with a factory of ceramic,'
And they wanted to propose ceramics,'
which were three meters long and one meter wide,'
but only with three millimeters thickness.'
And they wanted me-- or they were'
thinking that I will show that as a floor'
and walls, et cetera.
But I wanted to express a thickness--'
the extreme thickness of the ceramic by making--'
sending them up, crossing sheets of--'
still to maintain them vertical, to build like a cube.'
But cutting the cube with, like, a balloon'
passing through, to be able to come in'
and to walk on the edge of the ceramic, which'
is 3 millimeters thin.
So architecture, because I do architectural also.'
So first, Macro, the Museum of Contemporary Art in Rome,'
that I won in 2000 and finished and delivered in 2010.'
So this is-- is it?
OK.
So we are here.
This is the extension of this part, which'
was just renovated in these two old buildings with a courtyard.'
And this site is 3,000 square meters of footprint.'
We are at the corner of two streets.'
And there was an entrance here, and then we'
have to create a new entrance here.'
So I decided to cover all the site'
with a roof that fills all the site, to create a new entrance'
here at this corner, to install the main exhibition'
room of 1,000 square meters at the corner--'
simple-- to have in the middle a foyer,'
to have in the middle of the foyer is the auditorium.'
Above the auditorium, a glass surface with a fountain.'
It's a fountain because there's water running on it."
To leave a little bit of a hole into the ceiling with a garden,'
with trees.
And to maintain what I was asked to maintain,'
this structure with a roof.
We are at the corner of the two streets.'
And this is the new entrance.
And the glass box here is a cafe, because we are in Rome'
and in Rome in every street there are cafes.'
And you go to drink coffees everywhere.'
So I wanted to have the coffee in the street.'
There is no coffee at the moment.'
So the entrance is to come into the cafe.'
The glass box is suspended to the existing facade'
that they had to keep at both sides.'
And to come in, you have to pass under the cafe without columns.'
So the box is flying above.
And you have to cross the little garden'
with the trees [? growing ?] very fast to the roof'
to enter into the foyer.
And the foyer is black.
Everything inside is black.
It's the first time that I use black in one of my buildings."
I know that everybody believes that I build in black,'
but this is my first building in black.'
And, if you look carefully about the floor, the floor is basalt.'
And basalt is a stone which is used in the pavement in Rome.'
So the city is coming into--
the city is coming into--
this is back.
I want to go back, but I don't know how to go back."
There is no way to go back.
Doesn't matter.
So this is--
I don't-- no mistake.
So the floor is a continuity of the street.'
So this is a public space, internal public space,'
which is running everywhere.
And in the middle of that, we have the auditorium.'
So, the new part of the museum is installed'
between two surfaces--
the surfaces of the floor, of the foyer, which'
is internal public space, and the surfaces'
which is above the external public space.'
And in between, we have another layer,'
which is this surface, which is a promenade at mid-level'
into the foyer.
Passrails that helps to go--
that drive you to go above the auditorium.'
And with a fountain above and with water running on it.'
And the auditorium is non-regularly'
shaped, specially shaped irregular'
to be able to give the impression that it is a little'
bit unstable.
And digging the floor down to install lighting.'
And the last director installed mattress'
underneath with little video screen here.'
And the kids were laying under the auditorium'
to watch the video collection under the auditorium.'
And the auditorium is painted in red outside.'
And you can enter in it using this ramp.'
And inside, everything is red.
This is the heart of the place, a place where you gather,'
a place where you meet, a place where you discuss about video,'
about cinema, about art.
And the city asked me at one point'
during the development of the project'
if I wanted to design everything.'
And we decided to design everything,'
including the seats, including the lighting system,'
including-- so it's a global, total project."
And the main exhibition room that I told you'
is 1,000 square meters, and in the brief,'
which was very little, they asked for different heights'
in the space because they didn't know at the beginning"
that it will have been a contemporary art museum.'
They were thinking of having performances'
to having theater to having dance ballet, et cetera.'
So they asked for different heights.'
So it goes from places where you have 11 meters high to,'
on this side, 7 meters high.
And in between, you have this passrail,'
which is coming from the foyer, traveling along the wall going'
up to the terrace.
So this is a possibility to visit and to exhib-- to look at'
and to watch the exhibition, which'
is down from this passrail.
It's another layer of promenade under the structure, which"
is quite heavy because I didn't want to have"
any columns in the museum.
This is just a flying roof, as I said, supported by the wall'
in between the foyer and the the exhibition room and the pyramid'
tile walls.
Above, this is a huge space.
This is a place, a square, a public square.'
Because you can come from the former entrance,'
across the courtyard, take a ramp,'
come here, travel this space, take a stair somewhere there,'
and go back to the street.
So you can traverse the museum above.'
That means that this place becomes a public square'
for the surrounding area.
And this is more than a public space because--'
a public place because there is a fountain'
and there is a restaurant and there's a cafe with a terrace."
So this is a place where you can stay as everywhere'
in the square in Rome, sitting outside in front'
of the restaurant in front of a fountain.'
And we designed the lamps for the terrace also.'
And the cafe is multicolor floors.'
I don't use only black.
This is multicolor floor for the cafe.'
And by having the cafe at the mid-level and the terrace'
above with the restaurant, that means that the floor down'
is at the level of the usual entrance of every building.'
So the floor is as the museum--
the entrance to the museum-- is at the level of the entrance'
of every building around.
But the cafe is in the street, but it's"
at the mid-level of the building.'
So the people from the first floor and the second floor--'
the second floor and the subfloor'
are at the level of the cafe.
And the people who are living above'
are at the level of the public square above.'
So everybody is taking in account the spaces'
of the museum in front of them.
Toilets.
I love to design toilets.
Because this is the only space in a building where'
you don't have regulation.
Think about that.
So you can experiment.
You can play with toilets, with the space of a toilet.'
So my toilets in the museum are like a container covered'
by stainless steel mirrors outside and inside, in stalls'
and over all structures.
In the middle of the space, you have this huge space,'
and at the extremity of both sides we have mirrors.'
So the space is repeated infinitely into these mirrors.'
And I did this experiment of space in a reference to a movie'
by Jacques Tati, Playtime And in Playtime that Jacques Tati did'
in the '60s, mid '60s, he was expressing"
the ultra modernity of the cities which were coming.'
And he did a movie where everything in the city'
is smooth, flat, bright, no asperity, no rugosity.'
And the main character, who is played by Jacques Tati,'
is walking into the city.
And at one point at the beginning,'
he enters into an offices building,'
and he's wearing laser soles under his shoes."
And because he is wearing leather soles'
and he's walking on a steel floor, it makes noise."
Click, clack, click, clack.
And I think, OK, this is nice for playing with that.'
So I designed everything in steel.'
So the floors, the walls, and the ceiling'
are in stainless steel mirror.
And inside in the infinity space, doing into the mirrors.'
In the middle of the space, there'
is this object, which is a parallelpiped white,'
and in glass.
And above it, there is a kind of landscape in depression.'
This is the only place where you can wash your hands,'
but you don't know how to do it.
So you have to go there, and you start'
to make dancing your hands above.'
And as soon as you cross an infrared ray,'
the cubes becomes-- the room becomes red,'
and the water is coming up.
And if you make dancing your hands at the corner,'
the dryer is coming up, too.
So you play, yourself, and you become actors in the toilets'
when you are going to make toilets in the museum.'
Everybody's smiling when they get out."
So, I love to design toilets.
In Paris, I received a call once when I was in a weekend'
from somebody who was the management of a new restaurant'
in l'Opera Garnier, which where there were never"
have been a restaurant, to do a restaurant'
under this cupola, which was an open space where the horse'
carriages were coming in before.
And after that it has been a depositor storage,'
so it has been absolutely in despair.'
So they wanted to establish a restaurant there.'
And I discovered that, as soon as--'
he told me that, OK, he wants to work with me,'
he had a recommendation from the Ministry of Culture,'
because this is more--
it is the most protected historical monument in France,'
because it has been untouched since Charles Garnier did it'
in the middle of the 19th century.'
And Charles Garnier not only did the building,'
but he designed the facade of the buildings all around.'
So this is a public space, protected,'
and a museum and a building, protected.'
So I had to--
for enclosing the space I had to create a facade with the space'
which was open to the outside.
And it was forbidden to create a facade, because the minister'
of culture said, don't create--
don't put glass here, because you"
will do a facade with arches or with columns'
that Charles Garnier didn't do.
I said, OK.
So I had to create a new floor, because the space was not'
big enough.
And they told me, don't create a floor,"
because Charles Garnier didn't do."
OK, Charles Garnier didn't do, but I have to do it."
So, it was the only place-- and as I said,'
you can't touch the columns, you can't touch the cupola,"
you can't touch the wall.
You can only touch the floor.
OK.
So I started by doing--
I have to close, so I started by doing this sinuous line'
behind the columns.
Because I know how to work with glass,'
I was thinking that by creating volumes'
of sheets of glass, sinuous, they will be self-stable.'
And anchored to the floor, they could be self-stable.'
And if I use a very clear glass, they'
will not see that there is-- they will'
see that there is no facade.
OK, so it was agreed.
After that, I had to create a mezzanine.'
So I continued to [? sinuous ?] the lines,'
and this without touching the columns,'
without touching the walls.
And this-- the position of this line'
was a long negotiation between me'
and the National Commission for Historical Monuments,'
because they wanted that I go back, because they wanted'
to-- that people coming into the restaurant'
will see that they are entering into the cupola,'
because they will see the center of the cupola.'
So this line has been a negotiation.'
At the end they agree, and it's like that."
So this is sheets of glass, coming up, undulating,'
coming up to six meters high, at the height'
of the [? corniche. ?] And then other sheets of glass above.'
An in between them, two maintain them'
in place, this little piece of steel.'
Inside, the mezzanine is built in steel structure, covered--'
surrounding by molded plaster.
And when doing that, I had to push back my columns'
close to the other columns without touching them,'
because I didn't want that I have any columns"
in the middle of the cupola.
So that means at this part of the mezzanine'
is in cantilever of 10 meters.
And by doing that system of construction,'
I did exactly as Charles Garnier.'
Because Charles Garnier did the project'
by winning a competition in 1950.'
And he was 35 years old when he won this competition.'
And he was modern for his time.
So he decided to build the structure in steel.'
So what you look at as stone columns'
is a steel structure surrounded by stones.'
And in between, there are the shafts for the ventilation'
and heating system.
So I did exactly the same.
A steel structure, surrounded by--'
I don't know to go back, sorry--
surrounded by molded plaster with everything technical'
inside and having that turning and twisting with this molding'
plaster with acoustic plaster, et cetera--'
different kind of plaster--
to make it absorbing, because of the [? mineralization ?]'
of the space.
The floor, the walls, et cetera.
I wanted to have an absorbing system.'
And in the back, there is a lounge with a long sinuous'
bench or sofa, if you want, with the doors'
coming to the foyer of the Opera directly.'
And underneath, it's like being under an animal, a very strange"
animal.
Everything is red and white.
And the lighting system-- the lighting devices--'
are in the pocket in the legs of the animal,'
because I didn't want to look at and to see any technical device"
in the building, because they were not'
seen from Charles Garnier.
And everything in the mezzanine is red, the seats and tables'
and the benches and the sofas.
There are a mirrors to express--
to enhance the impression of space.'
And, if you look carefully about the sides,'
the top of the glass, it has been'
cut depending on the cupola.
And every sheet of glass is different.'
The curve is different and the cut is different at the end.'
And this is not anchored into the stone,'
because between the glass and the stones'
there are 4 centimeters of silicon joints.'
I did also make another museum in France,'
in Rennes, in Brittany.
And it's in a park, a new park, in a new development"
area where there were before this piece of art.'
And this piece of art is a unique three-dimensional piece'
of art of an artist called Aurelie'
Nemours, a French artist.
It is a unique three-dimensional piece.'
And she is working only on numbers.'
And this piece is her number nine.'
Because every stone is 4 meters in height and have height.'
The section is 72 centimeters by 81.'
And the angle of the position of the square,'
because it is 72 stones, is the specific angle online.'
And she gave regulation to the architecture.'
So usually the architects will give regulation'
on architecture.
But this is an artist who gave constraints.'
She said that she wants to have a silentious facade'
for the museum, and she wanted not to light'
a piece from the building.
So I respect what she asked, and I'
decided to have a silentious black facade with two'
materials, because this one is above-- in front'
of the main exhibition room and down this'
is the lobby, the foyer.
But the height of the cut between the two materials'
is exactly the same height as the stones.'
And what you see as gray is black stainless steel mirrored.'
So because it's mirrored, it reflects"
and it plays with the sky.
So it changes colors all the time.'
Down, this is gray--
dark gray glass.
And because it's dark gray, you perceive it black in the day."
This is how it's built. So this is steel construction"
with a cantilever with a big structure of the main exhibit'
hall attached to the back side, which'
is a concrete block, black concrete.'
But this is black concrete, so that'
means that when it's dry weather, it's gray;"
when it's humid weather, it's black."
So this building is a monolith-- black monolith--'
with three kinds of blacks that are changing,'
depending on the weather.
So this is-- the entrance is here.'
You don't see it.
Doesn't matter.
Everybody knows.
And so this black monolith is cut in the middle.'
Like that.
And I tried to find a space into that black monolith'
by creating that.
By cutting the building, creating a big atrium'
from the roof to the storage, eight meters below,'
and having the auditorium at the entrance,'
but only the back of the auditorium.'
So when you enter, you see the light.'
You are full of light.
But you can't go into the space.
For going there-- to start traveling the museum,'
you have to go back to the facade and start to climb'
the steps--
the steps all along the facade, in between the auditorium'
and the facade.
That is transparent, and you are referring to the piece of art'
which is outside.
You go to the cafe at the beginning.'
Up into the park.
And on the back of the cafe, you can enter the space.'
And you start by climbing some steps.'
Sometimes it's a ramp, and sometimes it's"
a stair, with sheets of steel anchored'
into the concrete, just that.
And with the parapet, which is quite heavy on the round'
rails to make people not having vertigo and being protected.'
And the glass is suspended underneath.'
And you climb.
And you climb 30 meters high for this space.'
The exhibition rooms are very simple,'
because this is places far artists.'
So this isn't a place where architects"
can express themselves.
I just framed the park outside.
And, going to the top--
so the void is 30 meters high.
Open at the end to the west, so sometimes the sun is coming in.'
And toilets, again.
Black and mirror this time.
So, this is just a sinuous mirror in between the basins--'
the wash basins for the men and women.'
When you go to wash your hands, you'
look at you curved or in the inverse of a curve.'
So you never look at yourself as you are, because you'
are thicker or thinner.
Never your size.
And they find that at the beginning very violent.'
And I said, no, this is just for people being actor.'
And in the evening, the proportion inverse,'
so the the top becomes dark, the bottom becomes lighted,'
and we lighted the auditorium, until it'
becomes dark and totally black.
In Lyon, we have developed and won a competition in 2005'
and built in 2014.
And we are in the peninsula with the confluence.'
And this is [inaudible] of the city,'
with these cranes still there.
And at the end of the peninsula I'
want the position of this building.'
And these two buildings-- maybe you heard about this building.'
This is the Musee des Confluences by Coop'
Himmelb(l)au, for Prix.
And this is 2,000 square meters of exhibition'
and a huge, huge, huge space inside for the entrance lobby.'
My little building, because [inaudible]'
in comparison to him is very tall, is 8,000 square meters.'
But it's more compact.
And this building was supposed to be a parallelpiped.'
And I decided not to do a parallelpiped--'
OK, to do a parallelpiped, but to shift'
the top part of the parallelpiped'
above the riverbank.
Shifting, why?
Because I wanted to have--
this is a riverbank, and this is a building in cantilever.'
One, two, three, four, five floors,'
in cantilever above the riverbank.'
And in the middle, I had an atrium.'
So I shifted the atrium, and the atrium is passing above.'
To build that building, we built at the beginning three pylons,'
a cross of beams, perimeter beams, and we hang everything.'
So we built from the top to the bottom, at the inverse.'
Like that.
And at the end, this is a building in cantilever,'
above the river.
Above the bank of the river.
And this is 25 meters of cantilever.'
And on the facade, what you see is a picture.'
It is a photo.
It's an artist piece.
Because we have been asked, for the competition,'
to work with an artist.
And I decided to work with Felice Varini, who is'
a Swiss artist living in Paris.
And this artist is working on the question'
of perspective point of view.
And he told me, when I came to him and said, Felice,'
I have a building that my proposal is very simple.'
It is a parallelpiped.
Can you transform my perception of my building?'
And he said to me, immediately, don't"
give an order to an artist.
I don't receive orders.
I said OK.
You do as you want, Felice.
You come back when you want.
So he came back to me some weeks later or some days later--'
I don't remember.
And he said, OK, architecture is very arrogant.'
Because when architecture is installed on a landscape'
or cityscape, it erases--
it erases-- the landscape which was there before.'
So I want to replace the landscape on your building'
to erase the architecture.
But in black and white.
So he took [? virtually ?] pictures'
on the top of the building, on the four directions.'
And we have here applied the photos'
of the scenery which was on the back and the four directions'
on the facade.
So you see that the cantilever has been shifted--'
shifted the auditorium.
And so that, when you come under the building,'
you see that there is a glass ceiling.'
And you look through the building.'
It's like looking through the building in the atrium,"
looking under the dress of the building or the [inaudible]..'
I know that I can't say that in America--"
excuse me, the States.
Excuse me-- I can't say that.
But I a woman, so I can say that.'
OK.
So, inside the spaces are very big on the ground floor,'
because it's good-- it's an events place."
Because it's a company who is doing events everywhere,"
managing the big events of the world-- of World Cup,'
Olympic Games--
so this is a very huge company.
And they wanted to organize events.'
So the entrance is very big.
And above the steel structure is very present.'
This is like a kind of a very strong structure.'
But everything-- all the floors around,'
all the open spaces of offices are open to the center,'
and they can communicate.
The spaces are sometimes open spaces, sometimes closed,'
with glass partitions, so everything is transparent.'
Like that.
And because we are in an office building,'
I had to face two problems, because I didn't"
want to keep the full ceiling.
Because if I had to transfer the energy of the [inaudible]'
to the slab--
there's a concrete slab.
And when you have a full ceiling, you can't do it."
You have to keep the false floor,'
because you have to have all the connections for the offices.'
But the [inaudible],, you could take it out.'
And you have to reorganize the system of [inaudible] very'
precisely.
But after that, I have to face two problems--'
the question of acoustic and the question of the lighting.'
I can find devices for acoustic panel or devices for lighting.'
And I was thinking, why not combining both?'
And I proposed-- did a sketch of an object which'
is what I call a Petal, which is an acoustic panel with lighting'
underneath.
And it absorbs the sound from the bottom and from the top.'
So my toilets in the [inaudible] are in red.'
OK.
This is just a toilet.
In China-- again I won a competition,'
because everything is by competition.'
It's a very interesting site, one"
I worked by driving from Nanjing--'
and it's a place where they discovered the bones"
of the first Homo erectus.
The man of Nanjing.
And into the cave of one--
one of the cave into the mountains.'
So I went to the site.
I visited the cave.
And it's very moving when you are"
walking into the underground in a cave'
in the grotto, where they found the bones of the Homo erectus.'
Because you think that you are walking'
on the same paths than Homo erectus.'
And so the site was so big that they'
said that we can install the building were we want it.'
So I decided to use the mountain as bringing my museum,'
because this is for the man of Nanjing who was living there.'
So I wanted to bring back the museum from the mountain.'
By playing with the lines of the site of the mountain,'
of lifting them, leaving them down, going to a model'
in papers for the museum, which is like that.'
And this is reconstructing, rebuilding,'
in a way, the lines-- the curved line of the site,'
but in another way.
And have the possibility to go up as a landscape onto the roof'
and inserting the museum into the landscape.'
Rebuilding the lines with stones on the facade.'
Recreating the lines on the landscape in the garden.'
Having in the middle--
somewhere in the space.
Not in the middle.
In the entrance, the foyer, which'
is an atrium-- with an atrium.
Because I wanted, again, to make people'
traveling into the museum.
But it's 20,000 square meters of museum,"
with a program which was very light.'
So I didn't know precisely what they wanted to have,"
but I know that they will have exhibition'
on both sides of the atrium.
And I know that it will be-- it will have been a lot of people.'
Not only thousands of people but maybe millions of people.'
So I wanted to play with the possibility for people'
to travel.
So I decided to create an atrium which is an irregular'
shape or form and to make it sliding from floor to floor,'
having escalators in between and not at the same place,'
to make people climbing to a floor,'
turning around the atrium to take the second one'
and turning and turning, to discover'
what is exhibited on both sides and to choose'
where to go to visit.
Climbing the space like that.
And to the top.
In Paris, we had before a very huge warehouse'
of 600 meters long in the north of Paris--'
inside Paris in the north.
It has been built in the '60s.
The city of Paris bought it in 2009 and it's-- no, not 2009,"
at the beginning of 2000-- and decided to transform it'
as a kind of a new area, new quarter of Paris.'
So they did a competition, and [? omar ?] won the competition'
and after that chose architects to build above the building.'
Because they discovered where they studied the buildings,'
that the structure was strong enough'
that they can build six floors above.'
So they chose architects for building housing'
above the building.
They cut the building to let the tramway passing--'
a new tramway passing through.
Continuing by housing, two buildings of offices,'
my building for incubator-- startup incubators--'
and cutting the building there, organizing the competition'
that Kengo Kuma won for sport facilities and schools.'
So this is a huge building of 600 meters'
long with multi-story facilities and commercial center'
into the old structure, two floors'
of car park underneath that they build.'
And my building is an incubator for start ups,'
so I decided not to have a normal facade for offices, just'
to make bubbles.
And on the south facade, they are white.'
On the north facade, they are black.'
And in between, my east facades are black and white.'
So, as soon as I did that for the facade,'
I decided that the building will be only black and white,'
except some bubbles in red.
Why not?
So, that means that when you enter, this is the entrance.'
Black and white.
Above, there is a flying bubble for meeting rooms.'
And the back, there is the same, another meeting room--'
bubble red, black, and white.
You can enter into the bubble like that, with a passrail,'
and you enter into the bubble, where'
you can sit along this table, which is not a normal shape.'
But you can seat by 2, by 3, by 4, by 10 at the end,'
if you want.
But you are always as you want.
We designed the carpet also with bubbles [inaudible]..'
And the lift floor, so when you arrive at the--'
when you take a lift, you have black and white.'
And you push the button.
And there is one black or one white which is coming.'
We never know.
At the first floor you have these big meeting rooms'
and conference rooms, red again.
At some floors-- on many floors--'
you have this convivial space, as they call it--'
[? colinear ?] space, where we designed the furniture to have'
places where people can rent--
sit around the floor to sit and to work,'
like a coworking and informal spaces for working.'
And on the top, when you have the bubbles.'
This is fantastic, because the view'
is over Paris is fantastic.
At this moment we are starting the construction'
of a tower in Barcelona that we won in 2015.'
So we are at the end of Diagonal, close to the sea.'
And we are precisely there.
Here, this is a formal--
the tower for Telefonica, for the telephone company.'
And this was a tower until there.'
It was a concrete block, not finished'
for 10 years, 12 years.
And an American-- and an international fund bought it'
and did a competition to transform it into a high-class'
level, high-level class--
I don't know, I always say that--"
for residential.
And we have to destroy a part which is on the back,'
rebuild more floors above--
so reinforce the structure to build floors above--'
create balconies in cantilever on both sides.'
So this is a huge construction at the beginning'
to create that tower.
With a floor which is 10 meters high for the lobby'
and the restaurant, and using again'
this curved facade on the back of the columns which'
are existing.
And by chance, the company who was'
doing the curved facade for L'Opera is based in Barcelona."
So we worked with them, we discussed with them.'
And I asked them to which height we can go.'
And they said nine meters.
I said, OK, we will do nine meters this time.'
So each piece of glass will be nine meters'
with a specific curve, et cetera.'
Playing with glass is nice.
On the back this is more scene.
And on the top, there is a swimming pool'
that you can swim with looking at the sea at 100 meters high.'
And some red balconies.
No black.
Red balconies.
I did sometimes a little project.'
So, I have been asked by an art collector who is owning this--'
oh, how can I go back?
It's stupid.
Doesn't work.
Oh, thank you.
OK.
I'm stupid.
Sorry, I have to keep [inaudible]..'
She is living here in this little castle'
above Grenoble in the Alps.
And here there is the Gulf of Grenoble, and this is a slope.'
And she wanted to have an artist residence at this place'
into the trees.
I went there, and I discovered that the landscape in front'
of--
on this side is absolutely amazing.'
This is the Alps chains in the valley of Grenoble.'
But I wanted to protect her from the place'
from the artist in residence, not to disturb her.'
So I decided to do a silentious black block, all in wood.'
So I decided, because we are in the Alps, to build in wood.'
So this is a wood block structure and outside'
and covered with black beeches, to protect it.'
And this black block, which is regular on the top,'
is twisted when it goes down, to have possibilities for the sun'
to come from different directions,'
without overlooking to the castle above.'
So we have a kind of a twisted block.'
Like that.
With the workshop for the artists,'
which is anchored into the fortification'
to protect the wall which is supporting the garden above.'
And a belvedere above, which is overlooking the landscape.'
So this is a black house.
And I did a white house.
So this one-- the first one was in wood.'
This was all in glass.
It's in Brittany, for a man who was an English man--"
and a couple-- who had an illness in his eyes'
and wanted to have something absolutely bright'
with a lot of maximum of light inside the house.'
Because he's an industrial, working with glass and steel,"
he wanted to build that in glass.'
So we did a total glass house.
Everything is in glass.
It's parallelpiped inclined, with white glass--"
with double glass together-- with a form inside.'
It's not transparent.
It's translucent.
And the black volumes are the kitchen and the bathrooms.'
Everything inside is in glass, even the staircase.'
And we have so little windows, transparent sometimes.'
But everything is inclined a little bit particular.'
And this one, I didn't design it."
This is not my design.
I have been called by the owner of this house when they'
returned from this house-- a brother and a sister--'
that [inaudible] house has been built'
between the mid '60s to the mid '70s"
by two men, the architect and the owner.'
And they built that by themselves, by hand.'
This is a steel structure, curved,'
whereas it projected on its concrete, polished by hand.'
And the back, they did--
they projected insulation and plaster, polished again.'
So it took a long time.
And this is, at the end, 600 square meters of bubbles.'
And they wanted to renovate it.
So I renovated and waterproofing the outside and renovated'
everything inside by colors.
So this is-- it's amazing, this house."
I enjoyed to do that.
It was really funny for me.
And living there, sleeping in the bed--'
a round bed in the round bubble-- is fantastic,'
believe me.
So, the first part that we renovated was a living room.'
So we did right at the beginning and renovated the cushions'
only.
So starting by-- because it was-- the cushions'
were like that.
So we rebuilt them.
And I started by playing with the colors.'
Because it was the '60s and '70s, and I was thinking about"
pop art.
So it was multi-colorful.
We started with the colorful.
And after that, we did--
this is one of the bathroom.
Can you imagine?
I took a bath in that bathroom.
This is fantastic.
[laughter]
Look at that.
And we did pink, black, more pink.'
Sometimes mandarin, sometimes orange, depending on the room.'
Sometimes more, again, pink.
Look at that.
I dream of having drawn that.
And these are designs that, I was--'
when I discovered that, I thought,'
my god this is so amazing to do that.'
The corridor, between outside and inside.'
And at the end, the last room that we renovated, we decided--'
because we, after-- we did that in five years.'
We campaign every year of renovating part of the house,'
playing with colors, et cetera.
So thematics of the rooms were in one color.'
Then playing in different layers of these colors.'
At the end, so--
and we did colors by colors.
At the end, for the last room, and when'
I speak about the room, this is a bedroom, a living-- no,'
two bedrooms, a living room, a kitchen and a bathroom.'
So they are, kind of, apartments.'
Because the owner had two kids and every kid had an apartment.'
And they're all connected.
This is why, at the end, it was 600 square meters.'
So at the end, I did not have ideas for a new color.'
I said to the owner, maybe we can use all of them together.'
And we played with all the colors at the same time,'
like that, creating the furniture sometimes.'
So this is fun, it was fun.
And I too, I said, after the first year,'
I said to the owner, you know, I think'
that the statement of the house, and the colors is,'
too much is never enough.
This is book by Lapidus which is titled,'
Too Much is Never Enough.
And I like to be-- to think that too much is never enough.'
This is a good statement for students in architecture.'
Too much is never enough.
[applause]
No, no, it is not finished!
[laughter]
So I do design, I do design.
So I won a competition for the UNESCO headquarters'
for renovating the [inaudible].
So this building has been done in Paris in the '50s"
And I won the competition for [inaudible]..'
And as soon as I won the competition'
for the [inaudible],, the director told me,'
but you know, in the conference room, which'
is 700 square meters, we need furniture.'
Can you propose us something?
I said, can I design?
They said yes.
Because I was dreaming of designing furniture, but OK.'
So I first starting by doing the counter.'
And because it was from the 50s, this building, I said, OK,'
'50s were the early time of plastic."
So I will do the counter in plastic.'
So I went to a little shipyard one hour from Paris,'
and we did together the shape.
We shaped the counter, which is 11 meters long, in plastic.'
And the color of this object, the orange,'
is coming from a fresco on the back, which'
is by Picasso, 50 square meters of fresco'
by Picasso in this hall.
Because this building, which had been'
done by Marcel Breuer and Pier Luigi Nervi as the engineer,'
was in the '50s And in the '50s at this time,"
they were doing what they call the synthesis of art.'
So when they were building a building, an official building,'
they were also asking to--
they were asking to the artist of the time'
to propose a piece of art.
So they had a collection, a huge collection,'
of the artists of the '50s.
So they have a fresco by Picasso, which'
was orange in this fresco.
And they wanted to have seats.
So I designed, for my first time, seats,'
and I wanted to do it.
So I was thinking that how can I deal with a collection of seats'
in that huge hall.
And I was thinking back to the sofas'
by Pier Paulin, this French designer who'
was in from the '50s and who died some years ago."
And he did at this time, it's what he called the snake."
An articulated sofa, that in the main hall, a big hall,'
they were buying because it was very'
easy to make it like a snake.
So I wanted to rebuild a snake.
But I wanted to design seats.
So I started by doing an armchair'
with a seat and a back.
And after that, I did a confidante--'
that means a two-seat with a back which is twisted,'
and you can sit on both side--
and canopy, with a back and a seat which are connected.'
And if you look carefully, the seats, the side,'
are all the same, so you can mix them'
and you can combine them as you want.'
And you can make this snake thanks to the confidante.'
And the leather color has been chosen thanks to a tapestry'
by Le Corbusier in the same hall.'
And they wanted to have a table, so I did a plastic table, for 3'
meters long with 70 centimeters wide,'
and little legs and the structure,'
and [? on ?] this is by the folds.'
And they needed to have a paper basket,'
so I folded aluminum, polished in a certain way,'
to confuse the perception of this folds, and an ashtray.'
After that, an art gallery asked me to do a place for storage'
in this gallery.
So I proposed this box, which is normal by parallelpiped.'
But we can open it like that, by sliding apart or lifting'
the walls apart.
And the plaza lamps that I did for the MACRO in Rome.'
And I continue to work with Luceplan,'
and I did this pendant lamp, which is [inaudible]'
now, because this is using, with a disc'
underneath, the indirect lighting'
by using the underneath surface to be'
a reflector of the lighting.
And Alessi came to me once and asked me for a tray.'
And I was thinking, OK, what can I do for a tray, with a tray.'
So I was thinking, a rectangle, a round, or a square?'
I said, OK, rectangle, I can play with more with that.'
So I took--
I designed two rectangle and shifting one of the other,'
with each of them, and lifting the sides.'
And because those two rectangles have been shifting,'
the sides is not regular.
So you can't take my tray in the middle of the side,"
as usual, to bring it.
You have to take it like that.
And if to bring it like that, it's much more nice."
And so I call it Alice, because it's Alice in Wonderlands."
What you see is not what--
What you look is not what you see.'
Or what you see is not what you look.'
Because it seems not to be flat, and it's absolutely flat."
And I did a fruit basket, to make the fruit outside,'
going outside.
And oh, no, my god, what happens.'
I repeat that, no.
And in Gangzhou, they asked for 15 designers to propose a lamp.'
So I propose a stone with a light underneath.'
And I did a knife.
I have a friend who is a designer, a French designer,'
with a direct-- artistic director of a knife factory.'
And he called me once, and he said, Odile,'
do you want to design a knife?
I said, a knife, why not?
And he said, it's a folding knife."
I said, oh, I love folding knives.'
Because man usually loves folding knives.'
Because everybody has a knife in his pocket,'
and this is a folding knife.
But more of that, the folding knife'
is a knife for the workers.
And if you are the kind of company of worker,'
has a specific knife.
So I was thinking, OK.
But this is for table, OK.
But I was thinking after that, how to design a knife when'
you're an architect.
You are doing buildings and you have to do a little object.'
So I did a model with my hand with plaster.'
And after that, I passed my model'
through the hands in the office to check if everybody'
was comfortable with that.
We did the model of the blade.
So it was a little object like that.'
And I brought to this man my model, and said,'
this is my knife.
He said, you did a model for a knife?'
I said, yes, because I did not know how to design a knife,'
you know.
So I did a model, and they build it, and now it's sold."
This is a very expensive knife.
[laughter]
I'm sorry.
Because it's not a regular shape."
And the gallery where, I talked at the beginning, the art'
gallery close to my office, when I renovated,'
I renovated the gallery in 2007.
And he has a dog.
And he lived with--
he was living with the dog, because the dog died this year.'
But in 2007, he was alive.
And so he wanted to bring back the dog basket in the art'
gallery.
And I said, no, a dog basket in an art gallery, it's"
impossible.
This is ugly.
I will design a basket for your dog.'
So we went to visit the dog.
And we measured the dog when he was standing up, lying,'
or sitting.
And we came to--
we did a molded aluminum object, with a mattress'
inside that we asked somebody to sew for Victor.'
And Victor died this year.
So the house is still there, but he's not here."
So I suppose I did that, I did to this gallerist.'
So I can do that from human to micies.'
And in 2013 he asked me for the micies.'
And I did that one.
So if you want to-- if you have micies in your house,'
you can have my house for them.
And can I-- do I talk to my school-- oh no, I'm tired."
So maybe we stop there.
No?
Or you want to talk about-- that we talk about the school?'
OK.
[laughter]
OK, I have to drink.
I have a glass.
So this is a school.
So why to do school?
Why to establish a new school in architecture?'
Because, as I said, what I think about architecture today,'
as a culture and a discipline to help people'
and to help the world, we have to rethink the pedagogy'
and the way to teach to you.
So young-- there are some others than students in the audience,'
but to the students.
I talk to the students.
I talk to the student, now.
Because you are not as us.
You are not listening we were, are we are doing.'
You are not memorizing as we are memorizing.'
You are not concentrating as we are made concentrated.'
Because you are the digital generation.'
And because of that, you are not the same.'
You are different.
I don't compare.
I don't say that one is better than the other one."
You are not the same, and because'
of that we have to change the way'
we teach and you are being educated in architecture.'
And at the same time, we have to take into consideration'
that students today loves to build,'
or love to do, fabricate, do something with their hands,'
or whatever.
So to be able to understand the way between thinking,'
designing, and fabricating.
And this is very important to understand'
this link, because this is the only way to do something,'
and after, and to--
for helping again.
And because, with architecture, you can become architect or you'
can become who you want.
Because doing studies in architecture'
is educating yourself to understand who you are'
and who you want to become.
Because if you think that, have you'
heard about this music group, music band, The Who?'
Yes.
They were all architects.
The Talking Heads, they were all architects.'
They were all meeting in the school of architecture,'
and they were architects.
If you think about, Orhan Pamuk, he was writer from Istanbul,'
he was studying architecture.
If you think about--
there are many, many people.
If you think about Courreges, the fashion'
designer, the French fash-- he was architects.'
So with architecture, you can do what you want.'
So you have to think about that.
Architecture is more important than being an architect.'
And architecture is really the core'
of the way of thinking and helping the world.'
And because of that, this is why I'
think that we have to change the way of educating.'
And I feel a bit of that in this school.'
This is why I like this school, and this school very cool,'
as I said in the beginning.
Because I know that, for you, it's"
normal to have a place for studying,'
a place for working when you are a student.'
In France, it doesn't exist in any school of architecture."
So in my school, they have places for working.'
Thy have the key of the school and they can'
come, as you are doing there.
But is not-- is rare.
It's not everywhere.
In my school, also, they have the key of the school'
and they come when they want.
They can go to the workshop down,'
they can use the machines, they can do what they want.'
But as soon as they are responsible, autonomous,'
and able to think, and to create,'
do things that they can help.
And they are responsible, mostly.'
At the same time, I think that today,'
because when you do inquiries about the young generation,'
you don't want to be salaries to some--"
in the company.
You want to be by yourself.
So you want to become entrepreneur, in a way.'
So we have to educate you to help you to become entrepreneur'
in the world of tomorrow.
Because we are in the 21st century.'
My generation, the generation of your teachers,'
we were happy and very lucky.
Because we were living in a world'
where the transformation was going, was undergoing.'
And we just wanted to push, to push'
the transformation of the world, to push'
it to go faster and further.
You, at the end of the 20th century,'
everything has been broken.
So the 21st century is to be invented.'
So I'm very jealous about yourself,"
because you have to invent a century.'
And this century is your century.'
Because you will have been educated for being, and being,'
and living, and working, and doing what'
you want in that century.
So I can't believe that, so lucky the luck that you have,"
to have a century to create, to invent.'
So first to think.
So first to dream.
More important duty of a student today'
is to dream, to dreams the world,'
to understand what is coming, and to be'
able to invent the world.
Thank you.
[applause]
Would you mind if we take some questions?'
Yes, yes, no problem, no problem.'
So, Odile, if we could take some questions, comments.'
Yeah, I mean, it's like really great to hear you speak,"
and it's like really inspirational."
I think that we are in a different generation now.'
And I feel like with digital technology'
right at our fingertips it means that now,'
like, the ability for students to directly concentrate'
on craft and the art of making, is way more imperative than I'
think it was in your generation, which'
was about the avant garde and questioning everything.'
And I think now, this sort of hardcore resurgence'
in design and, like, the actual object-making'
is really important.
It's like powerfully demonstrated in your work."
I don't have a question, of course, but--"
[laughs]
But I think that the idea of movement in your architecture'
is pretty clearly defined and represented.'
And I was thinking about the ultimate movement architecture'
building, like the Guggenheim, and how it just perfectly'
circulates the people.
But it seemed like, in your photos,'
it's not really about, like, the circulation of the people,"
per se, so much as like the architecture'
itself taking on this movement.
And so like, I look at the main atrium space of that one museum'
with the, sort of, ellipse white egg-shaped.'
And you went to like this very clear strategy of delineating'
the escalators as these big clunky objects, which'
I felt were sort of like climbing up'
this sort of like curvaceous object.'
And I felt like that sort of dialectic relationship'
of things acting upon other things'
was clear in your architecture.
Yeah, thank--
Your question is?
I don't have a question.
I just figured I'd say something."
OK thank you.
Thank you.
[laughs]
Actually, yeah, I have a question.'
The, sort of, school you're creating right now"
is really something brand new, especially seen'
from the French perspective.
Could you talk a bit more about the school'
you're founding right now?
About what?
About, everything about it.
So just--
Everything.
[laughter]
Describe it.
You have to come.
Why is it new, especially in France?'
What is the new thing?
International.
Speaking and teaching in English and French, mixed.'
So everybody has to teach and to speak both languages.'
And that is not only.
It is also about the fact that we--'
there are no permanent teachers.
Teachers are coming and people, because it's--"
I'm not there every day, because I can't."
And nobody is there, so students open the door when'
the teachers are coming.
If I can control the system.
And they go to the airport or the station, train station,'
to welcome them.
They bring them at school.
Because they know that they are coming because we tell them.'
And they receive them.
They make them visiting the school,'
and after that they start to teach for.'
And this is not--
because people are coming from abroad or for somewhere else,'
another place, so we don't have just one course"
for one hour or two hours.
We have just long system of long period of teaching.'
So we have only what I call seminars, and not courses.'
Because I said, at the beginning,'
that you are not memorizing as we were memorizing.'
So if we have a course on whatever subject'
one day for two hours, and so it continues week after.'
In the meantime, you have forgotten everything.'
So it's losing time.
So I prefer to give-- to have three days of teaching'
on the same thematic, on the same history of architecture,'
construction or whatever.
And at the end, the students are memorizing something.'
And it acts-- it ask, also, to the teachers'
to change the way of teaching, because they'
can't do just a lecture for three days,"
for doing three days.
So they have to invent new ways of approaching, discussing,'
debating, making the students understanding'
what they are talking about.
And they do it.
And so, and after that we have a workshop which are three--'
one week or 10 days, and a long studio for the semester.'
But it's really another way of interacting with the students,"
that maybe you have it here, I don't know."
But we don't have it anywhere in Europe."
Because I'm teaching-- I was teaching in many, many places,"
and I never see that already.
So we are doing that.
Because we depend on-- we will look'
at what are our students today.
And half of our students are from abroad,'
half are from France.
And what else?
[laughs]
Hi, so earlier on in the talk, you'
distinguished architecture thinking from design thinking,'
in general.
I'm wondering, what do you feel that--"
do you feel that there's a difference in the process,"
when they're--
between architecture thinking and design thinking.'
Because there is a process of design in architecture,'
but not only.
This is why I said that we have to invoke,'
because we can work more than-- more disciplines'
that only design, that only further design.'
Because when-- and this is why, in my studio,'
I want that my students are doing research,'
and they are able to think.
They are able to construct, to build'
a way of thinking, a way of researching for thinking.'
Taking a position, being engaged in a subject,'
because if you are not engaged, and if you'
don't take a position, you will never take risk."
And life is risky.
You have to risk everything.
Every day of your life is risking.'
And doing architecture is taking a risk,'
because you have to overpass the regulation.'
You have to try to do something more.'
You have to try to give more to your client.'
What your client is asking you something,'
where you have to take the risk to give him more.'
And this is taking risk, that always in the taking'
care of the budget, talking the normal things, budget,'
et cetera, but, OK, and regulation.'
But sometimes, you have to take the risk'
to go over, to go further.
Otherwise, you only stay on your place and you don't leave."
That's why I think that architecture"
is more powerful than design--
and the design.
At Confluence is there a particular pedagogy,'
or previous experimental architecture school,'
or pedagogical school of thought that you are inspired by there?'
I was looking at--
because it took for me two years to think about how to do it,'
and I was looking at different experiences in the world.'
And but not only from students, even from my school'
or little schools, and I was looking at Montessori,'
I was looking at Steiner, I was looking'
at some experiences in Finland that do some-- as they do,'
they did, they are doing now.
I was looking about the one, in close to Chicago,'
it's a school of art.
Cranbrook?
Cranbrook, exactly.
Because I went to Taiwan.
And in Taiwan, there were some teachers'
from Cranbrook, who came 25 years ago in Taiwan'
and, because they were Taiwanese and some'
are American and English, and they went and they established'
a school of design, because it was'
forbidden for them to establish a school of architecture.'
And they were doing something absolutely as I like.'
Something, mixing everything, and students'
are free to choose what they want.'
It's a bit-- it's bigger than what we are today."
So maybe at the end my students will be free, too.'
But as for the moment, is they can't."
And it was for me an example.
And they are other experiences, because I'
heard that there are other people who are trying to--'
I don't remember the name now, but excuse me."
After one day, I'm a bit tired.
But I was looking at many, many different experiences'
in the world to understand what I can do.'
Yeah.
Maybe one more, maybe the last question.'
Thanks for sharing.
My question is, how much the French culture'
influence your architecture?
Because I think you design a lot of architecture'
around the world, like you mentioned about China.'
So I just wonder about your culture root of France.'
So I'm from France, because I am French."
So I think that I have a kind of French roots.'
And but every time I go somewhere, I build for a place.'
So whatever the place is--
and if it's in China, if it's in Italy, if it's in Spain,"
if it's maybe in the States--
I look at the place, and I design for the place.'
So that mean-- because it's not importing an object."
It's not having an object which can travel"
and being established whatever you want.'
No, it's for a place.
And I don't know.
My roots are French, and I have some specificity, certainly,'
which are French.
But I don't know which one.
And I'm not with this neoclassical vision"
of French architecture, always the entrance in the middle'
with symmetrical buildings, for example.'
I don't like that.
So I'm always on the beside of that."
I always try to do something in diagonal,'
because I like diagonal.
I like to go on the other side and to turn around the object.'
And then because I was looking a lot about how,'
in East of the world, you are entering into a building'
with sliding like that, not entering into by opening'
the door inside.
I love when the space is giving you'
the possibility to move, and to walk, and to be in movement.'
And because I'm curious about everything,"
I'm inspired by everything, not only architecture."
Architecture is not my only nourishment.'
I look at planes, cars, objects in the industry,'
what happens in the shops, or what'
happens in the world, what is happening in technology, today.'
I'm curious about everything.
And I think that is a certain quality'
refers to that in architecture, being able to dream'
and being able to be curious all his or her life.'
Odile, thank you so much for being here.'
Thank you.
[applause]
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
I can't believe this is the first time."
