Hello.
Good evening and welcome.
I'm Eve Blau.
I'm the co-director of the Harvard Mellon Urban"
Initiative, which is the sponsor for this event.'
And I'm very pleased to welcome you"
to tonight's lecture and panel discussion and conversation."
This is the culminating event, as many of you'
probably know, in a three-part series of interventions'
and workshops that have been taking place'
over the last couple of days, yesterday and today.'
On Wednesday morning, there was a workshop called Intervening.'
And some of the speakers tonight were part of that workshop.'
And earlier today, there was another.'
It was called a Talkshop on Agendas,'
which was also with representatives from Assemble,'
and actually, most of the speakers tonight and Stephen'
Zacks and Sandra Branch of the Flint Art Project'
in Flint, Michigan.
So this program as a whole, this series of events'
is intended to offer students and other people who'
are participating hands-on engagement with methods'
of intervention and critical debates about the agency,'
or how the agency to transform the public realm'
can be and is seized by artists and architects and curators'
and critics and various public sector actors.'
Now, before I introduce Stephen Zacks,'
who is going to moderate tonight's conversation,"
I just want to say a few words about the initiative'
as a whole, the Mellon Initiative.'
It is a cross-Harvard project, which'
means it crosses the various schools at Harvard.'
It's funded by a four-year grant from the Mellon Foundation."
And that grant and the project itself'
are directed towards exploring interdisciplinary'
and multimedia methods for studying urban environments,'
societies, and cultures across the design disciplines, so all'
of the disciplines that are here, but also the humanities'
and the social sciences.
And the idea in all of this is that,'
with a common object of study--
the city-- we can begin to bridge'
these disciplinary boundaries and learn from each other'
and have conversations that are really fruitful.'
So for the last three years, we've"
been carrying out research and site visits, site travel,'
with faculty and students from different schools'
across the university.
And we've been focusing that work on four cities,"
on Berlin, Boston, Istanbul, and Mumbai,'
which we see as portals into specific geographies'
and urban issues.
They're very different cities in very different parts"
of the world.
And through that research, actually, and the conversations'
between these portals, we have been opening up'
a very interesting, actually, and quite broad'
field of comparative research across geographies'
and cultures.
So this is our fourth year of the project.'
And our focus has shifted from site-based research and travel'
to public programming.
We've had an extensive series of conferences and colloquia"
and workshops and panel discussions'
across the year, most of it, actually, in this semester.'
And in those events, we've tried to address major themes"
that have emerged in the course of our research'
and our work in the portals, but that also extend quite a bit'
the discussions beyond the portal research.'
And this is one of those events that'
really moves quite far beyond the research'
that we've been doing and very specifically grounded,"
actually, here.
And so before I introduce Stephen,'
I want to thank the Mellon Foundation and the Graduate'
School of Design, especially Dean Mostafavi,'
and also Associate Dean and Interim Chair of Architecture,'
Michael Hays, who has been supporting this program.'
And I want to thank the organizers, actually,'
of these events--
Eric [? Ganoyu, ?] who is our program manager, who'
has masterminded all of these things, Michael Haggerty, who's"
been working with him for about a year on this,'
and Ken Stewart, who has also been'
working with us in the last little while on this project.'
The structure for the evening, Nato Thompson will present.'
Then his presentation is going to be followed'
by a response from Paloma Strelitz'
and Anthony Engi Meacock of Assemble.'
And then it's going to end with a conversation between Thompson"
and Assemble that will be moderated by Stephen Zacks.'
Well, I had left out--
I'm terribly sorry.
Sandra Branch is part of that too.'
OK, Stephen Zacks is a distinguished architecture'
and urban journalist, theorist, and cultural producer'
who's based in Greenpoint, Brooklyn,"
and is a native of Flint, Michigan.'
He received an MA in liberal studies'
from the New School for Social Research and BA'
in interdisciplinary humanities from Michigan State University.'
He served as an editor at Metropolis Magazine.'
And he's received a number of awards"
from various institutions, including the Warhol'
Foundation, Creative Capital, ArtPlace, the Graham'
Foundation, the National Endowment'
for the Arts, the MacDowell Colony, and the New York State'
Council on the Arts, and the Newtown Creek Fund.'
He is also the founder and creative director'
of the Flint Public Art Project, which'
organizes public events and workshops'
and temporary installations to inspire residents to re-imagine'
the city, to reclaim vacant and underutilized buildings'
and lots, and to use innovative tools to steer'
Flint's long-range planning.
Please join me in welcoming Stephen Zacks.'
[APPLAUSE]
Thanks for the kind introduction.'
So as Eve said, I'm a journalist covering"
public art, architecture, and urbanism for Metropolis,'
currently Architect's Newspaper, and an organizer of projects"
meant to impact the public realm.'
And I'm excited to welcome Nato Thompson to discuss public art"
and urban engagement as a part of the Mellon Urbanism'
Initiative.
Curator and now artistic director of Creative Time'
since 2007, Nato has played a formative role'
in shaping the field of public art'
and its engagement with the city through his annual Creative'
Time Summit and projects like Pedro Reyes\' "Doomacracy,"'
Kara Walker\'s, "A Subtlety" in the former Domino Sugar'
factory, "Living as Form" a survey of socially engaged art,'
questioning the boundary between art and socio-political action.'
Trevor Paglen\'s "The Last Picture,"'
which deployed a record of human civilization sent into orbit,'
and Paul Chan\'s "Waiting for Godot in New Orleans," which'
was an outdoor staging of Beckett'
as a testimony to the government's failed"
response to Hurricane Katrina.
He's brought a new order of criticality"
to art that happens in public places, which'
can be seen as answering Rosalyn Deutsche's"
call for a public art that facilitates'
the expression of social groups excluded'
from the current organization of the city'
and help appropriate the city as a vehicle for illuminating'
contradictions.
Previously, Nato worked as a curator at Mass MOCA,'
where he curated The Interventionists,'
Art in the Social Sphere in 2004,'
which helped articulate the intervention'
as a defined typology of practice.'
And apart from his role as curator,'
Nato has been an important voice in the field whose writings'
have appeared in book form, frieze, art form, third text,'
and Huffington Post.
And moreover, he has authored two books--'
Seeing Power, Art and Activism in the 21st'
Century, and most recently, Culture as Weapon,'
the Art of Influence in Everyday Life, which'
brings insight and urgency to the question of how culture'
serves as a tool of propaganda and liberation'
in our political moment.
So please welcome Nato Thompson.
[APPLAUSE]
Hey, guys.
Thanks for coming out.
I know you students got homework to do.'
So yeah, I wrote a book.
Just for all of you younger people,'
I want you to know that if you write a book,'
you will make no money.
But it feels good.
And feeling good is a good part of life.'
And you could kind of feel fancy.'
So this is the book, Culture as Weapon.'
I want to talk about it because--'
I'm going to give two parts of my talk."
There's going to be two parts.
You've just got to bear with me because it's"
going to feel somewhat schizophrenic,'
but we'll try to be delicate about it."
The first part, I want to go on what this book is about,'
which this book is in some ways trying'
to talk about public art, perhaps,'
or culture-making in the city, but not made by artists.'
So we'll get into it.
But that's the first part.
And then the second part is I also'
just want to talk about some public art projects I've"
done, to just get into the kind of practice of public art,'
if that's OK.
And then we'll have some discussions."
Good.
And I work at a place called Creative Time.'
That's our brand.
Since we don't have an architectural facility,"
we are like a guerrilla organization'
that does public art projects throughout New'
York and sometimes the US.
And we're starting to think about doing work"
internationally.
But when you don't have an actual house"
that you call your own, your brand becomes your house.'
All right, that's our brand.
All right, so I want to start with something very unorthodox.'
Let's get it.
Where is it?
Where are you?
OK, there we are.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- NATO Forward Operating Base, Morales-Frazier.'
The outpost of US Marines and French paratroopers'
is surrounded by Taliban forces.
[HELICOPTER WHIRRING]
- If you all could stand over there, please.'
- John Green is preparing a military mission'
with an unusual objective.
- Stand over there for now, please.'
- He and Dr. Matt Arnold are part'
of a group of civilian social scientists called The Human'
Terrain Team, a key to turn the people here away'
from the Taliban.
- Uh, Richard's gonna ride into the lab."
The cameraman, we're going to put in the bab."
And you're going to want to be--
- For the next 18 hours, our crew'
will embed with them as they head'
outside the secure perimeter into the front lines'
of the conflict.
- The valley's gonna be on the left."
We want the gun on the left.
We want you on back side.
Hey, y'all be careful.
We'll see you out there.
- Roger.
- The chances that the Taliban will'
attempt to strike this mission are high.'
They likely know Matt and John's destination,"
a highly publicized town meeting.'
The helicopter gunship sweeps the route ahead of the convoy,'
looking for signs of insurgent activity.'
On the ground, safely moving the four-person Human Terrain Team'
requires 30 armed soldiers and seven armored vehicles.'
But the mission is critical.
As part of an effort to win the hearts and minds here,'
the US funded the building of a paved road.'
But the plan has backfired.
Road construction has bulldozed homes.'
Villages are now threatening to join the Taliban.'
The team must somehow make amends.'
[END PLAYBACK]
[LAUGHS]
Sorry, it's not funny.
But it's like, but something went wrong."
They built a road and plowed through people's homes."
That did not endear them.
So this is--
Wouldn't you want that voice narrating your wake-up"
in the morning?
I don't know when National Geographic got that style."
It was A while ago.
So this is a doc around a system called the Human Terrain'
System, which is, in fact--
one of my chapters in the book goes into this quite deeply.'
It\'s called "The Insurgents."
But it talks about the moment during the Iraq War'
where it moved from--
Donald Rumsfeld's War of Shock and Awe"
was its adage to Hearts and Minds.'
And Hearts and Minds was the brainchild'
of Petraeus, who came in.
And Hearts and Minds was a model of fighting warfare'
that borrowed its entire toolkit from a large trove'
of information from counterinsurgency models,'
pulling particularly from the French occupation of Algeria'
to the insurgency of Mao Zedong.
And what's interesting about it-- and you're like,"
we're talking about public art.
Why are we dealing with the Human Terrain System'
in Iraq and Afghanistan--
is because when Petraeus came into the military, what'
was fascinating to me was they called it'
the cultural turn in the military,'
which certainly pricked my ears up.'
And when I started looking at the methods they used,'
which was-- just to say, Petraeus was'
a big advocate of what we need to do when we go into Mosul,'
for example, is we need to build roads, build schools, hold'
tribal council meetings, get to know people.'
Those soldiers need to get out of their tanks'
and walk the beat and get to become a face in the community.'
And when I was looking at these methodologies,'
it occurred to me that it looked strikingly'
similar to the same kind of tactics'
I was invested in with public art.'
And so this book is a kind of opportunity'
to look at methodologies of sociality'
across a wide variety of discourses.'
So in this particular chapter, I get'
into the military and the ways in which the Hearts'
and Minds approach, or the cultural turn,'
I look at that and its methods.
And part of it hints at a certain kind of reflection'
back onto art itself.
There are some other chapters, one of them'
which I called "The Real Estate Show"-- and certainly,'
it will be germane to our conversation today.'
And I'm sure most of you in this room"
know more about the subject than I do.'
But it's looking at the last 20 years"
of the growth of the phraseologies'
of the creative city, the creative class,'
that terrifyingly creepy word called the creative,'
and the other friendly word of it that is also creepy,'
the innovation.
I don't know if you guys use those words here."
They just sound like a gross Ted Talk thing.'
But you know, the world where capitalism has entirely'
embraced the language of creativity.'
And now, we have a world where everyone'
is encouraging everyone to be creative at all times.'
The arts, profoundly, has left the arts,'
and has become a kind of logic of urbanism itself.'
So with that in mind, I will also turn to the public art'
projects.
But I'm looking for a certain kind of--"
I guess one of the things I want to think about'
as I talk about my public art projects is--'
not mine, but to be fair, public art is a team sport.'
It takes a lot of people.
It's a village kind of style.
But to think about the complexities of the forces that'
are using culture to get things done for a variety of reasons,'
and understanding that operating within that landscape'
requires some savviness, and also, I think,'
some self-assessment about impact,'
and quite honestly, a kind of getting real about'
some radical politics because as much as like this'
might seem crazy, right, when we talk about gentrification,'
or we talk about the ways in which urban development is'
predominantly funded by developers,'
we are talking about an occupation,'
and we're also talking about techniques of community"
development that do not only reflect the methodologies that'
are deployed by the US military,
but I would say a similar kind of ethos at times as well.'
And so that produces real problems'
as you look in the mirror.
For me.
Not you, maybe.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know how you look in the mirror."
So we'll go to some projects too because I"
think it's also good to ground things in practice."
So you go to view slideshow.
So I work at a place called Creative Time, like I said.'
I am 45 years old.
And so is Creative Time.
It was founded in 1972.
Oh, what happened?
It just disappeared.
It just disappeared.
Oh, my gosh.
No, no, hold on.
He's coming.
It's OK.
I'll just talk to you for a bit.
Just come over here.
So in 1972, Creative Time, which was started'
by basically artists who were interested in doing projects'
in the city--
you can imagine the urban environment of New York'
'72 was so different than New York City gentrified,"
nightmarishly overpriced, urban development'
city that it is today.
Thank you, brah.
So in 1972, artists were interested in using abandoned'
derelict spaces to do projects.
So there was projects like Art on the Beach.'
There was projects where they did a drive-in theater, which'
is totally impossible to imagine now,'
where you would just drive your car up'
and they would project films on the sides of buildings.'
And it was a way to kind of invigorate the landscape.'
And through most of the '70s and into the '80s,"
that was the kind of language of the arts in the city,'
that it was a kind of space to produce ideas and operate'
culturally, but also, in a kind of ragtag, not'
well-funded, guerrilla aspect.
And for most of the first 50% of Creative Time's life,"
it was a shoestring budget.
And it was much more, like, artist-driven,'
in so much as it was very performative'
and not in your classic public art sense of, like,'
pink sculptures.
It was much more like guerrilla activity.'
And so I say that because that particular period is'
so different than the world we live in now.'
Not only is New York different, but also the kind'
of urban landscape that one operates within'
is also different.
And our budgets are different.
So I've been here since 2007.
And the relationship, which we'll"
get into too, with the art in public with developers,'
for example.
And there's not just an abandoned building"
down in Brooklyn we're just going to go and do"
guerrilla project in.
That's just not the case.
So it is a totally different environment.'
Let me get into about project.
When I first got to Creative Time,'
the second project I worked on was a project'
called "Waiting for Godot in New Orleans" by the artist'
Paul Chan.
And this is two years after Hurricane Katrina.'
And the idea, which was-- you know,'
it's funny because it's not an original idea at all."
It was totally, overtly borrowed from Susan Sontag,'
who\'d done "Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo"'
during the Balkan Wars.
And Paul was interested in doing Waiting for Godot'
in the landscape of New Orleans, because he'
said that the landscape reminded him'
so much of every production of Samuel Beckett's play"
that he'd ever seen.
But simultaneously, what became interesting about this project,'
and which will feed into the conversation around community'
engagement, was Paul eloquently stated'
that he wanted to do a play with a front end and a back end,'
the front end being the production of a play,'
and the back end being the production of a public.'
And when I think about what that means, which is just to say--'
he also said-- which I think was great.'
He said, we're gonna to organize this project Hezbollah style."
And I said, what do you mean by that?'
He was like, well, we're just going to go door to door"
and ask people what they need.
And that's how we're going to organize this project."
And so he was talking about a kind'
of Saul Alinsky, leftist community organizing model that'
is applied to a very traditional kind of theatrical production.'
That model of working-- and we could'
get into that, because it's interesting--"
has really informed a lot of the work'
I've done since because the production of the play, to me,"
is not just a production, you could say.'
It's just a production of a theater."
And we worked, actually, with the Harlem Theater Company'
to produce it.
And we also benefited greatly, because the star of our play'
was a gentleman named Wendell Pierce, who was also'
the star of the show Treme.
And he featured prominently in the show, The Wire.'
I don't know if you guys have seen it."
Of course you have, because that's what we do."
But Wendell Pierce also brought that to play.'
But the production of a play, what'
was fascinating-- and to me, that's also in some ways"
a symbol of the production of artwork, which is,'
there is an artwork or a sign.
But then the back end is the social relations'
that are put into play to support the symbol.'
And the symbol without the social forces at play, I think,'
is something I'm not as much interested in anymore."
I'm interested in how putting a sign into the urban sphere"
sets into action an opportunity to rethink social relations.'
We did simple things.
We hosted community dinners.
We did potlucks.
We worked with local community organizations.'
And the thematic of waiting became a profound symbol'
for many different things that people were working through'
in New Orleans, from waiting for their FEMA trailer to arrive,'
waiting for their asthma test, because the FEMA trailers had'
so much asthma problems, waiting for their insurance checks,'
waiting for people to return, waiting for the city'
to actually address their concerns,'
waiting for the federal government to provide'
any kind of aid.
So waiting became an important metaphor'
to deal with this tragicomic terrible situation, which'
just to say, is still entirely unresolved.'
The other thing I'd say too-- and it's"
important to bear in mind-- is that was a project around race,'
obviously.
And the Hurricane Katrina is entirely'
a story about race in America.
But when we started working on it, it was interesting,'
because people said to us in the white community of New Orleans,'
oh, you're going to do a play in the Ninth Ward of New Orleans?"
No white people will see your play.'
And then when we talked to organizers of color'
in the neighborhood and they said,'
oh, you're doing a theater play?
No people of color are coming to your play.'
So it was like, basically, the word we got from everybody'
was no one's coming.
So of course, we took that into our hearts.'
And we said, well, then we definitely should do it.'
But we did.
And what was amazing was we had a very heterogeneous audience.'
And it broke down a lot of space around race and class'
that really stuck with me, because as we all'
know, finding spaces that are truly mixed race,'
mixed class are rare in our very racialized society.'
And finding space to produce that is'
important and meaningful, and also something one'
should always take note of, particularly in the really'
racist, weird art world.
I mean, and it is racist, right?
Most art stuff you go to is just like, what the hell?'
I did a project by the artist Jeremy Deller,'
where we took a car--
this is his idea, by the way.
I'm just a supporting guy.
We took a car from Baghdad, Iraq that had been blown up'
in a marketplace bombing.
And we traveled it through the United States'
with a US soldier and a Iraqi soldier, who had just'
come from the war and were able to talk to people'
about their experiences.
And I'm going to show a clip of one of the people talking."
[LAUGHS]
I'm really embarrassed by that picture too, just to say."
Sorry.
Hold on.
Here we go.
Oh, this one will do it.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- I was a civilian contractor with Kellogg, Brown and Root,'
which is a subsidiary of Halliburton.'
And I was in the Morale, Welfare, and Recreation'
Programming Department.
There were kind of the regular things'
of planning basketball tournaments and arm wrestling'
tournaments and events like that.'
And a lot of what I ended up doing'
was really off-the-radar, informal kinds of things.'
I think one of the most exciting and unusual activities that we'
started to run was a regular Pictionary and manicure night.'
And this is for US military personnel, men.'
And they got really excited about Mary Kay manicures'
and would come on a nightly basis'
and stand in line to have their hands softened.'
So there were really unusual things like that.'
- Does that mean they were very bored?'
- They were incredibly bored.
They were bored out of their minds.'
They were in the best shape of their lives'
because they worked out all the time'
and really sat around waiting to be given things to do.'
And also, I think the most shocking thing for me'
was experiencing the futility of a lot of the missions'
that they were sent out to do, patrolling just to give them'
something to do, which was insane.'
[END PLAYBACK]
But just to say, so this project, if you looked at it,'
you would think it was the most boring project ever'
because it was a way to get people talking about the war.'
And so you would just have two guys sitting'
around this blown-up car.
But what was fascinating to me was'
it was a way to, in some ways, produce a social space'
that wasn't mediated by Fox News or CNN,"
a way to touch upon the conversation of the war that'
was open to just discussion from people that had been there'
and get their firsthand knowledge from it.'
And while we worked on it, what was fascinating to me'
was we were so concerned about getting attacked'
by right-wing zealots or patriots who felt like this was'
very anti-war, but in fact, where our concerns were totally'
opposite of what occurred.
Because the people involved in the war were eager to discuss.'
In fact, we found so many young, like, 20-year-old kids'
and 21-year-old kids who had already'
done a few tours that wanted to talk'
about it and their families.
So people touched by the war were the most eager to talk in'
public about it.
The pushback we got was from the left wing, in fact.'
A lot of the activists said, this is ridiculous.'
You know, the war is going on.
Why would you put so much money toward something so ambiguous?'
You should put something towards something'
directly against the war, you know.'
And one guy said to us, which I thought'
was fun, because he had a Hurricane Katrina moment.'
He said, it's as though like Hurricane Katrina happens"
and there's bodies in the streets."
And you want to do a project about the merits of Cajun food.'
That's not the time or place for that."
But I thought that was interesting to me.'
Because, of course, in some ways,'
it was a public art project that people'
felt like-- so we have our activists who'
felt like it was too ambiguous.
Right?
And then we got a critique in The New York Times'
that was convinced that it was good therapy for America,'
but it certainly wasn't an art project."
Just to say, public art is one of these things where'
you have to have very thick skin, because you know'
it's successful when everyone talks about why it's bad,"
which is, like, my whole--
I'm surprised I'm here with you guys at Harvard"
because if you look at all my reviews, it's all negative."
[LAUGHTER]
But that's the public sphere.
It's like democracy is a world of people hating on each other."
[CHUCKLES]
All right, I'm just going to go through a few more projects."
I have so many fun little things.'
We did a project in 2010 with the artist'
Paul Ramirez Jonas, who I think has done a bunch of projects'
up here, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
He's great.
I love Paul.
So we did a project called "Key to the City."'
I think he's got a little piece of land"
out here that people in Cambridge have got to key to.'
That's right.
So we did this project, "Key to the City," which'
became the official key to the city of New York for one month.'
And Mayor Bloomberg actually announced'
it, which was pretty fun.
We released 36,000 of these keys.'
You would go Times Square.
And you had to actually bestow upon someone.'
So it was very ceremonial.
And the key to the city that you would physically'
get in your hand after doing this ceremony'
would open up physical spaces throughout the Boroughs,'
from the super higg-end, important social capital'
spaces, to super private quiet spaces,'
to certain peculiar spaces.
So for example, there was a locker'
at Gleasons Gym in Brooklyn that you could open.'
You had to go in this boxing place, go in the back area,'
open up this locker.
And there was all this boxing memorabilia there.'
You could go to tortaria.
It's called Tortilla Nixtamal in Queens."
And you'd go to the back door, open it with your key."
You could go down these stairs and make tortillas'
with the people working there.
It was awesome.
You could go to Bryant Park, put your key in a light,'
and turn it on and off.
Pretty fun!
You could go to the Brooklyn Museum.'
And it was like Scooby-Doo.
Between these two paintings was a little door,'
and you opened it with your key.
And there was a private exhibition for you.'
Isn't that awesome?
But there was also a private exhibition'
in the mayor's house, at Gracie Mansion"
because he never lived there.
He's like, sure, you can use the house."
I mean, this project was a total pain.'
All of them were a total pain.
But this project was a pain because we'
worked with Port Authority to get access to the George'
Washington Bridge so that you could open up'
the pedestrian walkway to walk across the bridge.'
And first of all, I don't think hardly"
anybody did it, which is a shame, since it required'
4,000 meetings to get done.
But it is important to be able to open up the bridge'
to the city, literally.
But what's fun about that too was to me,"
the project is kind of a metaphor for public art, which'
was it was offering access to things you already had access'
to.
And the key becomes a space of opening up'
between the private and the public.'
And then, for me, Paul Ramirez Jonas joked.'
He said, you know, this is going to become'
my cows on parade project.
That's all people ever going to want me to do anymore."
But it's a great project.
I kind of wish every city would just do it.'
So feel free to steal it.
It's OK.
I mean, but tell him.
We also worked with the artist Tania Bruguera on a project'
called "Immigrant Movement International," where'
she decided to work on a-- well, the back story'
is very funny because she said to me,'
I want to start a political party'
for immigrants in America.
And I said, let's do that.
And then I realized what defines a 501(c)(3) is that you'
can't start a political party.
So I was like, wait, that's the one project I can't work on"
at Creative Time.
But we did start this project called "Immigrant Movement'
International," which became a space'
to think through the political imaginary of what'
a global immigrant community would look like'
and how it could function.
And this was in partnership with the Queens Museum.'
And so she produced this space in Corona, Queens, which'
became a community service center and a space of thinking'
about the global possibilities of a citizenry that's"
truly international, without national borders.'
And just to give you a sense of the community organizing that'
went into this-- because this is one of those things you can say'
is great, but until you understand the work that goes'
into it-- the back end, as Paul Chan would say--'
you don't know.
And the back end of this-- just let me give you a sense of it.'
These are all the classes they offered.'
And it continues to go.
So it's been going for six years now."
That's a lot of work.
I worked with the artist Suzanne Lacy,'
where we worked with community organizers and activists,'
400 of them women, to do a project between cross-race,'
cross-age, and cross-disciplinary'
on the conversation around contemporary feminism,'
basically, and gender rights.
And the way it was orchestrated, after talking to a gazillion'
people to get involved in this, was to actually'
have these kind of conversations that were on stoops across one'
street in Brooklyn, where you could listen in'
on the various discussions that people were having.'
I'll give you a little video of that too."
Oh, I'll do that one too.
I'm gonna check my email while I'm here."
[LAUGHTER]
I'm sorry.
Well, I'm running out of time.
I'll do something else for you.
So we'll do this Kara Walker project too"
because it is kind of like my platinum album.'
So we worked with the artist Kara Walker in the Domino Sugar'
factory to do this giant project.'
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So this was a large scale sculpture'
in the old Domino Sugar Refinery plant in Williamsburg.'
- --an elaborate, sort of marzipan, or sugar sculpture,'
made of sugar paste, a kind of fondant that typically,'
in these large banquets that would have been thrown'
in the medieval era at the court of King Henry.'
They would have had a main course and then'
a sugar subtlety.
And then people would eat it.
So it had all this kind of power of ingesting'
this desirable precious substance,'
but also, you're sort of ingesting"
the power of the king.
Anyway, when I heard the term "subtlety," I was a goner.'
I was like, oh, I have to make a sugar sculpture.'
I was like, oh, of course!
- I'm really proud that Creative Time"
is undertaking this extremely ambitious project.'
It's not just ambitious in scale."
It's ambitious in terms of its content."
Kara Walker is encouraging us to look'
at things that are so visible in our society that we wish'
were invisible-- our histories of slavery'
and our contemporary relationship'
to slavery, immigration, migration, mythologizing'
of black women's bodies.
And it's our belief at Creative Time"
that public art creates a space to engage'
in those difficult conversations.'
[MUSIC PLAYING]
- The Domino Sugar factory is doing a large part of the work.'
I mean, the accepting of the building'
itself is creating the context.
And it is, like, the sculpture.
It is kind of the subtlety.
To make a piece that would sort of complement it, echo it,'
and hopefully that contain these assorted meanings'
about imperialism, about slavery,'
about the slave trade that traded sugar for bodies'
and bodies for sugar.
So these are these cast figurines'
that were made entirely of sugar here.'
And then we made this enormous Sphinx-like sculpture'
that was covered in a sugar slurry is the word.'
But that's not sugar. it was Styrofoam inside."
- --and we started to get an understanding of what'
parasitism was, a lot of people thought that it was impossible.'
And so it's been incredibly exciting to assemble"
this team of problem-solvers that have turned this'
into a reality.
- Well, the space in and of itself--'
[END PLAYBACK]
Anyway, so that was really popular.'
I got call them on my phone from Usher, Usher's people,"
asking to go backstage.
And I was like, well, it's public art."
It's free and open to the public."
Come on down.
Don't have a backstage here, Usher."
But just to say, it was a really impressive project.'
People came.
And and also, Kara Walker, of course, she's"
incredibly brilliant, but she also'
understood the nature of public art'
and really went for the monumental-- literally,'
monumentality of it.
And it also, fascinatingly enough--'
just say something very--
over the years, it's shifted dramatically in my experience"
with public art is the role of social media in terms'
its profound ability to produce discussions with art'
in public, because I mean, every one of our projects now,'
even if no single reporter reported on it,'
would just become this-- it just takes off in social medias'
spheres very fast.
I hate the word "grammable," but it is all very grammable.'
But also discursive, it gets people talking and debating'
and trolling each other.
But it's interesting, because it does become a kind of fulcrum,"
or a kind of catalyst for a certain kind'
of social, civic sense, which I find extremely'
exciting and interesting and new, relatively so,'
for the work we've been doing.
I want to show one final project.'
And then I will be done-ish.
And it is-- it ought to go here.
So it's funny because--
it's not funny.
But the same year that we did the Kara Walker project,'
I also worked on this project, "funkgodjazz&medicine,'
Black Radical Brooklyn."
And I think Kara Walker's project"
attracted 145,000 people.
And this project, which I'm sure many of you have not heard of,"
attracted 5,200.
So not a success in terms of audience.'
But I love this project, so I have to tell you about it.'
It was a partnership with this place called'
Weeksville Heritage Center.
And it is a historic African-American community'
that was started by a guy named John Weeks, who'
understood that if you owned property,'
you were allowed to vote.
And so he started encouraging free blacks'
to buy property in this area called Weeksville in order'
to produce a self-determined black community'
in the early 19th century.
So in 1968, this place had been lost to time.'
And a radical anthropology group from CUNY'
actually had heard about the history of Weeksville'
and wanted to find out if the actual homes or any legacy'
of it was still around.
And so they actually flew a prop plane over Brooklyn'
and found three of the original homes,'
because they actually went against the grid.'
And so they started a community organizing effort and made it'
a historical home and community center called Weeksville.'
And we partnered with them to do a project'
around radical black self-determination.'
And the site itself is very invested in that narrative.'
But I was also, on a different level--'
and something I'm very invested in in terms of this"
conversation and just future work is I kept thinking about'
how the money is spent as being one of the most important parts'
of a project and where the resources ,'
go not just what it's about, but where the resources actually"
end up and who they support.
And so thinking about the money of a project'
as going towards sites of black self-determination in Brooklyn'
and to encourage those struggles and to also support'
the people doing that work, rather than a project that just'
abstractly talks about that.
But I guess, to be simple, a project that puts'
its money where its mouth is.
And so this project, which only had 5,200 people come,'
involved partnering artists with community organizations'
that embodied that ethos to produce projects together.'
And then the idea would be that you would go to see the show'
and go to each different site of black self-determination'
to see an artwork.
So we had the artist Xenobia Bailey work with the Boys'
and Girls High School.
And she worked with a class there.'
And then they produced a space in one of the historic homes.'
We worked with the filmmaker Bradford Young.'
He wasn't as famous then.
But he just was up for an Oscar for cinematography'
for that film, Arrival.
And he did this cinematic piece with the Bethel Tabernacle AME'
Church, which was the first black-owned church in New York.'
And so he worked with their congregation'
to produce a film that was situated'
in one of their old buildings.
We worked with the group Otabenga Jones and Associates,'
with the local jazz consortium, to produce an outdoor community'
radio center that was in the back'
of a chopped-in-half pink Cadillac with big speakers'
in the back that became a radical community radio station'
that was there for six weeks.
And then we worked with the artist Simone Lee'
to do a project called the "Free Peoples Medical Clinic,"'
inspired in two parts-- one by the history'
of radical black nurses, and secondly,'
with the Black Panthers project around doing community health'
services in Oakland and across the country.'
So this actually was a partnership'
with a local community health organization that'
had been started by Josephine English, who'
had been the first black female OB-GYN in New York, who also'
delivered all six of Malcolm X's children,"
and was really invested in the conversation around community'
health.
And so this space became a way to not only think'
about preventative medicine, but also holistic medicine.'
She offered workshops of yoga.
And it was weird, too, because she'
had this kind of like sci-fi soundtrack in there'
and these kind of futuristic, beautiful nurses'
that were just like, come in.
And there were herbs everywhere.
And it became this kind of community center'
that was dreamy and possible and really, really popular'
and grew and grew.
But just to say, I say that as kind of interesting way, maybe'
as a way we can kind of think through when'
we talk about my first video, which was--'
I guess I'd say community relations is"
a certain kind of way of ameliorating tensions.'
I think there's an important way of working where"
the resources go towards the struggle and the people'
invested in it.
And I do think it is very much about race in the city.'
And it is about not just talking about things,'
but where the kind of capital and capacity go.'
I also say that because as you know,'
the conversation on gentrification and urbanism'
is so important.
And it haunts everything we do at this point in Creative Time.'
And I think it haunts most of the work anybody'
is probably doing in many cities.'
We were joking earlier that I hope when I die,'
someone's going to let me know if I"
was for the force of good or bad because sometimes, it's"
really hard to know what force you're fighting for when you've"
got developers paying entirely for your projects in cities,'
and the forces of capital, really,'
not just ambivalent, but very aggressively exploitative'
towards the most oppressed communities in our country.'
So I'm invested in a kind of social justice politics"
and a radical politics.
But it's not enough just to say that."
You actually have to be kind of Machiavellian'
and radical in terms of the ways in which you organize'
or as you organize Hezbollah style, if you will.'
So that's what I have to say.
It's not your typical approach to public art, I know."
But at the same time too, I'll say one other thing"
the magic of public are for those of you that are not'
really interested in public art as something you study a lot.'
I do believe profoundly in the power of art.'
And I say that as much as I'm very Marxist and political, I"
believe deeply in the power of dreams and weirdness'
and irrationality and dysfunction and unfunctionality'
as a space to open up the deeply pedantic utilitarian space'
of the city, to find spaces where it's not overtly"
a commercial or an advertisement to produce space,'
or it's about debate, it's about wonder,"
and it's about the complexities of the civic that"
ignite us together.
Finding room, and I think it requires a bit of a wrestling'
match with the forces that are very'
powerful in the city to over-determine everything,'
is where the battleground lies.
And I think it's one of the great battles."
And as much as we live in one of the most'
terrifying political climates in my lifetime with Trump'
as the president, but as much as it's easy--"
I think it's important to push back on that--"
I think it's also simultaneously important to fight"
for the power to be non-obvious and ambiguous'
and dream at the same time as you fight back.'
So thanks so much.
[APPLAUSE]
Is that good?
OK.
Thank you.
So we're going to ask Assemble to join us"
in conversation with Nato, as well as Sandra Branch, who'
presented with us this morning.
And maybe just because we hadn't planned enough mikes,"
I'll stand up here for a second.
[LAUGHTER]
Oh, thanks.
I'll be your interrogator here.
So I guess because I'm normally thinking about your work"
as being super political and socially activist--'
and I even remember you from before you were a curator'
as an activist in Chicago, doing these public space projects--'
When I get arrested by MTV.
We tried to liberate the actors of the "Real World"'
from their unreality.
[LAUGHTER]
I'm not joking.
[LAUGHTER]
It was so funny.
They didn't find it funny.
MTV has no sense of humor when it comes'
to disrupting their film shoot.
But it was great fun.
So yeah, I thought it would be worth'
talking a little bit further about the curatorial process'
and the intentionality behind it.'
Because I mean, of course, public art is always'
caught up in all these implications'
of the potential knock-on effects'
for development and inflation of value and things like that,'
yet the ephemerality of a lot of things'
that you're doing in New York, I think,"
helps prevent them from seeming to have a direct impact.'
It's not like the Domino Sugar development"
wasn't going to happen if you didn't do"
a sculpture in that building.
It was already in the bank essentially.'
So can you talk about the extent to which you're"
able to try to produce social and political effects'
through these projects and what kind of aspirations'
you have as a curator to have consequences?'
Or is that too far?
That's fine.
So just to say, I grew up as an anarcho.'
I thought I was going to be a professional anarchist when'
I grew up.
And then I realized that's totally"
such a Berkeley College--
I went to Berkeley, by the way, if you can't tell."
But just to say, I got a job at Mass MOCA'
after grad school as an assistant curator.'
And I was convinced my entire life'
that the art world was evil and that if you'
had any radical ideas, they would just kick you out.'
And I was actually on trial for this real world thing'
when I got my job.
I only say that because I found a real connection'
with the director there, Joe Thompson, no relation,'
because while he's clearly not a Marxist,"
he's raising the dough with the Williams College people."
We did agree on something that I thought helped me a lot'
in this, which was he was very populist.'
And it's a museum in a town of 12,000."
And he was invested in art that spoke to all people.'
And so was I. And while we didn't"
have the same political analysis,'
our enthusiasm for a certain kind of public discourse'
made me understand that the contradictions that capital'
could still find some kind of space--'
like, my analysis and his analysis'
could find some kind of commingling'
in our belief in the power of the civic,'
and then thinking of the museum as a civic space.'
And that's the same way that I've"
been able to wrestle that with Creative Time is'
because certainly our board is not Marxist--'
but that said, being relevant is helpful for art.'
And just to say, on the Machiavellian level,'
relevant art actually does well for artists and art'
organizations.
Go figure.
So it's just to say it's a strategic maneuvering"
through that.
And for me, it's like the production of meaning"
is political itself.
Meaningful things is political.
It's a different kind of politics."
But finding things that touches people's hearts and gets"
them involved and also thinks through race and class, all'
these things, we're already wrestling with."
And art that unpacks that and opens it up for people'
is exciting.
But it is a bit of a--
I mean, we could get in that.
It is a balancing act with trying'
to have a politics of liberation in a space that's deeply"
exploitative and proprietary.
I've got a question about that idea of capital, which"
is a term that we've come across a few times,"
is the idea of capturing [INAUDIBLE].'
Because when You talk about where the money goes,'
but I wonder if you could talk a bit more about where'
money comes from.
There's a complicit relationship between who funds these things,"
and there's an expectation that we have discovered"
a lot in the UK, that there's increasingly"
outputs required from the funding that'
has been delivered.
How do you negotiate those two?
I guess it's often quite oppositional in that--"
and what you're saying is trying to provide"
a kind of slack space for alternatives, where actually,'
the funders may frequently be looking for the total opposite.'
Well, yes, we are too, because I mean,'
we could do an ethnography of funding, if you want.'
Because it's peculiar.
And obviously, the United States has a very specific and unique'
nonprofit system that I know y'all over across the pond are"
certainly eager to mimic.
But certainly the culture of philanthropy'
and the systems for that are not the same.'
I mean, Creative Time has this interesting space'
because it's not just some public arts organization."
It's a public organization in New York City, which"
is just to say, there is a culture'
of philanthropy in New York.
And most of our board members are already'
on museum boards, which I think offers us'
a certain kind of freedom, because we're the kind of side"
project that can be fun, where I think they might'
want their artists represented more in like the Whitney'
or MOMA, like, OK, now, show these things.'
But we don't get that same kind of pressure in that space,"
frankly.
And foundations, honestly, it's bizarre."
But I found the social justice stuff is much more fun.'
The more overtly community organizing,'
the more foundations are like, yeah, yeah, yeah,'
that's what I want.
You know?
So I mean, just to say, it's like that stuff,"
in a kind of crass way, you can be playing that'
up more if you're just going for the dollars."
The stuff that's very hard to fund"
is the art that art world people don't collect and doesn't"
directly, obviously lead to some social justice thing.'
That's like the black hole of no funding."
And it's bizarre, because people would say, oh, wait,"
this socially progressive stuff, how in the world'
do you get funding for that?
But there's funding for that, particularly"
in Trump's America.
That's all people want is anything"
to get those kind of values on the table, which leads,'
in its own kind of industrial complex way,'
to everybody offering community organizing'
in a kind of crass approach.
You could say people do it just so they'
can get the funding dollars.
Right?
We're like, yeah, yeah, we have a community thing."
And they all write it up in the grant proposal,'
and they say they're doing those things because they"
know what the funders want.
And then they use that as a way to support something else.'
I'm not being mean about it.
But I guess we all understand that that happens.'
I'm curious.
So I think it's something that we grapple"
with within our own projects is how you deal with some'
of your projects, which you presented,'
which obviously have, I suppose, an initial impulse,'
like the immigrant--
Yeah, yeah, Immigrant Movement International.'
For example, or the medicine project in Brooklyn.'
And are they normally set up to have'
a limited temporal lifespan?
And do they ever grow to become more permanent?'
Or is that something at Creative Time that you'
help negotiate or try--
I'm curious.
That's a good question.
And certainly, each project has its own kind of situation.'
So for particularly with that one, that was a project--'
Tania Bruguera, because she's Cuban, she said, I'm Cuban,"
so I think in five-year plans, which I always'
thought was funny.
But she was like, I want to do this for five years.'
That was what she said from the outset.'
And that's what she did.
But at the same time, that one was a very odd project,'
because it was the one that looked'
the most like a non-profit NGO.
It's almost like the ready made in reverse,"
where she was mimicking social justice organizations'
to the point that it became a kind'
of experimental social justice organization.'
And so the conversation was like, do we keep that going?'
And It's left Tania, and it is still going."
And it is its own operating thing now.'
So that is something that was important to the work itself.'
But just to be fair, not to us, but also'
to put our cards on the table, we'
don't have the bandwidth or capacity"
to do long-term things.
And so if we were to do a project that'
had a long-term aspiration, we would'
need to negotiate a certain partnership that took it over.'
You know what I mean?
And that is a certain skill set.
And it's tough too, because I feel"
like one of the mistakes with social justice projects'
is where you promise things you can't deliver on."
And you make it seem like you're going to be around forever,"
but you really have no intention.'
When we were in New Orleans, everyone was like, well,'
why don't you stick around New Orleans and stuff?"
I'm like, everybody understood it's a play"
and we're going to leave town.
It's not like they're like, oh, my gosh."
I need you to stick around forever.'
But being very clear in your limits, I mean,'
I'm sure with your guys' work, you come across that."
Right?
Yeah, no, we've been having conversations today really."
And yeah, it's a tricky thing to negotiate."
And I think that one of the things that we discussed'
earlier was the way that you can unintentionally also become'
very emotionally involved in projects.'
And that's something that we have experience,"
where we have intended things to be more temporary.'
So for example, we talked about a project'
to set up an adventure playground in Glasgow.'
And the original impulse was for a 12-month play project.'
And once we were on the ground, that aspiration'
changed quite quickly.
And we found ourselves willing and wanting and working'
with the people running the organization there'
to try and make the situation more permanent,'
because it just felt like an important thing to do.'
And therefore, I guess that's where the question is born"
from, because I understand the need to negotiate'
these relationships, and that sometimes you'
do need to be able to walk away, as you say.'
And a play is a play.
And the curtain comes down.
And other times, you say, well, actually,'
what could happen if this could keep going.'
I Feel like that's the tricky thing."
It's like how one operates within a larger ecosystem"
is interesting to bear in mind, because while Creative'
Time does these projects, there's"
a certain thing that haunts me.
You start seeing these kind of utopian, imaginary spaces'
in urban environments popping up and disappearing.'
Right?
Yesterday, I was talking to someone.'
And they were like, well, what are we supposed'
to do about gentrification?
And then my buddy Trevor just said, well,'
you just get rent control.
Right?
But just to say, what I mean by that'
is you don't set up an experimental community"
in a neighborhood to demonstrate the political horizon.'
There is a certain space in which'
policy is important to address.
And it feels really annoying after a while'
where we demonstrate--
It's almost like I understand why we do temporary stuff."
A, we can't.
But also on a mediascape-wise, the attention span'
dwindles out, and we've got to do something new."
And so we are, to some degree, complicit'
in a certain kind of spectacle media logic, where'
if you did a project for 12 years, for example,'
you'd get an article in the beginning."
And then you'd be done media-wise."
And people would pat you on the back.'
Good work for 12 years, but your funding would disappear.'
You know what I mean?
So I feel like the temporality around this stuff'
also has its own problematics.
I was just going to--
go ahead.
I also experience that.
I work in a depressed area in Flint, Michigan.'
And when we put on projects, they're like, oh wow,"
I'm glad you did that.
I'm glad you're here.
But the one thing that you don't want to do is promise something"
you cannot deliver because then, that sticks with you.'
That follows you.
That's the monkey on your back.
Oh, I know her.
She promises the world and delivers stones.'
Or she's Santa Claus with a bag of coal."
We don't do that.
And that's why I always tell them, this is up to you"
how far this goes.
If you want this to continue, you'
must find a way to continue it.
Sustainability is in your hands.
And that's why I always do that.
But I want to know, because there's not"
a lot of funding in a desert like Flint,'
where everybody is in need, everybody's got their hand out,"
how do you bring that funding?
Even though there's a need for it, it's not available."
And with a depressed community like that,'
everybody's got their hand out.
And the only funding is going for water, water.'
It's like, forget the arts now.
It's water.
And when we started doing political murals'
about the water situation, sure, it got a lot of attention.'
Everybody was like, wow, yeah, oh, that's powerful."
But then the people that will fund you'
don't want you to display it in their area."
It's like, oh, yeah, that's great."
You're doing great work.
But we don't want you to bring it over here."
So what do you do with stuff like that?'
I mean, I don't know the answer to that."
But it is systemic, obviously.
Right?
I mean, don't you think?
I mean, obviously.
I mean, the funny thing is like, if I was a doctor of cities,'
and I took my stethoscope, and I went over New York,'
I wouldn't be like, this city suffers"
from a lack of cultural programming.'
[LAUGHTER]
You know what I mean?
But yet, it just keeps coming, cranking it out.'
And everyone's like, oh, we ought"
to do an art project here.
But Flint, you could use some cultural programming'
over there.
Right?
But where's the bang for the buck?"
What rich person wants to head out to Flint to do that?'
Right?
So there is a structural, racist, political component'
to these funding models.
That said, I would say--
my gut tells me that's Kresge is the one to go,"
to because they do support cultural programming'
in the Midwest.
Right?
Is that right?
Kresge has a Detroit program.
And it's very specific to the boundaries of Detroit."
And otherwise, you fall into the larger Kresge Foundation'
pot that's nationwide.
But they are in Michigan.
So that's helpful.
I'd say go to Betsy DeVos.
She's very philanthropic.
[LAUGHTER]
Right.
Or Erik Prince.
Sorry.
So I thought I would ask one more question along these lines'
and then open it up for others to ask questions.'
So Creative Time has this history, actually,'
going back, as you said, to the 1970s, 1973.'
And it was founded essentially to activate vacant office'
towers that were built in the middle of an oil embargo.'
And so there was this kind of great opportunity of vacancy'
that was then taken up by some of the cultural organizations'
that David Rockefeller was funding.'
And even though the work was coming out'
of a space of the Soho artists community'
and kind of a radical context, it'
was intended to serve as a tool of development, something'
that I think in our context in Flint'
and in some of your projects in England'
is a position that we're being asked to play."
And in the context of creative place-making,'
it's become a formulaic way that public art is being pushed"
and being funded to serve.
So I don't know.
What's your reaction to the broader narratives"
of public art that are prevalent right now?'
Well, it\'s just to say, this term, "place-making,"'
I don't know how ubiquitous it is."
So you guys get that word?
You do.
Yeah.
OK.
But I don't want to be snotty about it,"
because there are some good parts to it.'
So I am being snotty about it.
It's like a backhanded compliment."
There's some good things to it.
But certainly, what's interesting is it is"
about art in the public sphere.
And I've watched that learning curve, because at first,"
it used to be much more of this creepy, Richard Florida,'
creative economies logic.
But then I've seen it shift as the conversation"
around social justice and race have been pushing themselves'
into that.
And the funders, I think, have been'
much more cognizant in working with that, to think through,'
like, what are the implications.
And I also think with the growth of gentrification'
as a narrative within urban spaces'
that you'd have to really have your head in the sand"
to not talk about that if you're going to talk about development"
models in cities.
And it is useful because for me, it's"
much better than the conversation around art'
museums.
At least we're talking about race and class"
and political economy and urban space.'
So in that way, it's been a very productive space"
to interrogate.
At the same time, there is a lot of very'
misaligned and confusing politics'
that are going into a lot of money that'
is being thrown around.
But just to say, with the funding thing, two parts-- one,'
I do think the place-makings one is good.'
You got an ArtPlace grant.
Right?
And the other one I'd say is, I think all of us"
don't need to defend the arts.
We need to go on arts offensive.
Because I think the NEA's budget should be $1 billion"
and not sit there going like, can I please have $30 million?'
Because then, you can have a national program'
for cultural programming, because what'
we're talking with Flint, that's a federal problem."
That is something that can't be resolved by one foundation"
or an arts organization.
That should be a sustained program'
of social infrastructure.
I mean.
Sorry, I suppose I don't have an articulate response."
But it's making me think about something that I've"
noticed a lot in the UK and I feel'
is probably more extreme in the US, which is the way that,'
I suppose, money for public art projects'
is increasingly used by either people like us'
as well to do projects, which in some way'
are a panacea for things that should be, if you like,'
centrally funded.
And I think that's because that's where the holes are,"
and they become an interesting space in which to do projects.'
But actually, as you say, ideally, that money'
shouldn't be coming from these sorts of small diffuse spots,"
but would be coming from central government.'
Well, yeah, it's funny.
Because like yeah, exactly.
So let's say platform heads over to Stockholm."
And it's just a different-- it's like, you go to Stockholm"
and the environment of doing interventionist'
or urban development projects that we do in the US,'
it's so radically different.
They're like, oh, right.
Well, I mean, we really don't have as many things"
to complain about over there.
But like over here, everyone's like, look at me!"
I'm purifying water.
I'm, like, doing basic needs of a community that should"
be supported by the state.
That is the lament about socially engaged art'
often is that it's trying to put the finger"
in the dam of a total privatization'
of all infrastructure.
And we are part of that.
But the same time, it does more than that, I would say, too.'
Yeah, I think it's something though,"
that I, as someone who utilizes that for the funding field'
to be convicted by, whereas you are, in some ways,'
propping up an argument about allowing privatization'
and philanthropy as a model for social justice, which'
I think in some ways, politically,'
is quite dangerous.
But equally, it's better than doing nothing,"
which is the alternative.
In some ways, I personally feel like it's"
a quite horrible catch-22, where it's"
like you are providing backup for an argument'
about enabling social justice to be only'
through philanthropic enterprises.'
But also, without doing anything,'
that's going to happen.
Where do you intervene?
And where do you just let it go?
I mean, it's really tough.
Because you can start to feel like you're the charter school."
You're like, but I'm a well-intentioned charter"
school, but I'm totally playing into this defunding federal"
education policies.
So I feel that sometimes too.
But at the same time, to be more fair, it's funny."
To pick on Scandinavia, because let's do that."
They don't get a full pass.
At least with not-government-funded thing'
that we do, we can talk about flagrantly race and racism.'
We don't have to worry about staying on message"
with a giant PR machine.
I mean, there is some freedom in the model'
that we have that I find very valuable.'
It's bizarre because you can kick and push"
a lot more in this kind of model, I find.'
And that's useful in some ways to just throw"
some cards on the table.
I think that's true.
And like, somebody found again, by acting as artists,'
we're wearing a kind of artist hat."
You can do work that, if you can architecture commission,'
people that see them have certain outputs that you've"
got to get away with because it wouldn't fit."
It wouldn't tick the right boxes."
It wouldn't tick the right health and safety or output"
or other thing boxes.
And so there is a definite argument'
for co-opting and utilizing funds for art,'
because actually, there's a kind of level of freedom"
there, that you don't have the more practical outputs, so"
like traditional architectural outputs.'
I mean, it's the greatest passport of all time."
It's like your biggest visa.
Because when people get all utilitarian on you--'
they're like, what is that for?
Who does that affect?
How many tourist dollars does that attract?'
You're just like, I'm an artist.
I don't deal with your pedantic questions."
And sometimes, I feel like, hell, yeah, man.'
Sometimes it's good to push back like that."
You know?
Well, let's open up to questions, if anybody--"
I think there's a mike, a couple of mikes running around,"
a few, three.
Hi.
Thanks for the inspirational talk.'
I'm just wondering-- I had this question for the speakers"
this morning as well.
But do you think in time, these projects and this idea'
of public art as community engagement can be so culturally'
influential that it will shape market demand'
and kind of allow the market to support the initiatives,'
rather than being subversive to it?'
Or is it only art if it's subversive?"
I mean, it's already got market demand."
There's an artist named Theaster Gates who is filthy rich."
And he's doing community development projects"
that are very popular with Rahm Emanuel and the Chicago Bulls'
as big funders.
So just to say, there's a market out there."
But I wouldn't say it's big.
It's almost like with the art world,"
you get, like, three stars, and the rest of us go broke.'
I do think there's a certain kind of market sensibility."
But the arts are particularly fickle.'
It is a luxury good.
And it is all about scarcity in the arts in particular.'
That particular world is very scarcity-driven.'
And the sad thing about the art world'
is that the bigger the wealth gap,'
the better the art world does because, of course,'
there's just much more luxury money out there."
I did want to address that.
He's right.
It's the 1% that you're going for."
They're the ones that have that money to support"
and the money to pay for the projects.'
But we hope that yes, it starts a bigger movement that'
makes it culturally acceptable.
That's the orgasm we have in our brain about this art."
But it doesn't really pan out that way."
Usually, it's a passion that the artist has,"
that he's putting out there.
And he's saying, accept me.
This is part of who I am.
But yet, it's still, in public art, a voice of the people."
And so this is what they're saying."
But you can't hear them.
So it's not always a matter of how much"
money, but how much action that it inspires because it's art"
if it evokes an emotion.
It doesn't have to be good.
The emotion is there.
But also, too, is it Grand Rapids, the thing, art--'
Yeah, ArtPrize.
ArtPrize, right?
Isn't that thing hugely popular?
Yes, very popular.
And they're usually using students that are unknown."
So they do get a name.
They get their stuff out there.
And it's funded by the DeVos family."
Right?
1%.
My joke used to be that the foundations that'
have to give away 1% of their capital every year, and they've"
essentially stolen our tax dollars by creating'
private foundations.
And our job is to take it from them.'
I like that guerrilla Hezbollah thing.'
I didn't even know I was doing it."
But anyway, any other questions?
Don't be shy.
I think it's very interesting that you said,"
I didn't even realize that I was doing it."
I think for a lot of people who are'
activists and artists, that's one"
of the most difficult things.
When you are someone who is working within communities,'
somebody who is creating projects'
that are socially and culturally irrelevant, it becomes very'
difficult if you are not in an institution'
to understand what you're doing is relevant to the institution."
So I guess my question is, how do you'
seek that validation while understanding'
that things like funding are important,'
and as we've seen, while at the same time,"
not compromising our mission or our message?'
Anybody else want to--
OK.
Well, I think that you get your validation by when people say,'
that's what I was saying, or that's what I feel."
It's not so much what being put in a museum,"
or being put up on a building.
It's when you reach the people, and when you say,"
OK, I'm not the only one that feels this way."
I'm getting it out.
And I'm representing you and you and you and you."
And so together, we are this.
This is our voice.
See, we have a voice for the voiceless.'
And that is satisfaction.
And that is knowing that your work is accepted.'
And for me, the way I would respond,'
is that you do all this terrible work'
of writing grants and trying to bring the money from people.'
And then it's difficult. The committee meetings are"
difficult. People yell at you.
And sometimes, the projects are hated and all of that.'
You get trolled all the time.
But the thing that's kind of magical from my point of view,"
as someone who's not an artist and not a designer,"
is that you kind of create a process'
and you create a platform for people'
to create their own work.
And then when it works well, you get to walk into the project'
that you never imagined, but you created a space for it'
to happen in.
And that's kind of a joyous thing"
to see other people create in a place that you've set up for."
Life is a story called, you're not invited."
So I think it's important--
it's funny, because the museums would"
make you think that's the work that most people are doing."
But in fact, a lot of the socially engaged art stuff,'
there's so many people doing this in cities, like so many."
And it's more the rule than the exception really."
It's just that the spaces that highlight stuff"
don't reflect the actual composition of practice that's"
out there.
So I do think finding space to produce community'
and solidarity that are not reliant on the institutions'
is absolutely emotionally critical too.'
This guy Greg Sholette has a book called Dark Matter.'
But it's talking about the idea that with dark matter,"
it's the dark matter that holds the universe together."
But in the arts, it's a lot of these practices that"
hold the arts together that isn't actually"
in the institutions.
Now, I see that everywhere I go.
There's so many people doing social engaged art."
I mean, it's funny.
It's like such a lame term.
Because I just feel like people both want to make a difference'
and also are just inherently good'
with cultural manipulation.
So that is a modality a lot of people are comfortable with.'
Yeah, I mean, I totally agree with you.'
And I think what's so evident is that the lens that gets shone"
on certain people or certain projects is just that.'
It's a lens.
And there's a whole broader world out there where"
those things don't get seen.
And what can be really useful about those lenses'
is that you begin to look back at the world'
and see those things that you perhaps hadn't valued or hadn't"
considered or hadn't seen the cultural value in beforehand."
And it makes me think of someone like Jeremy Deller's work."
I don't know if people here are that familiar with him."
But he's a British artist who works"
very much with every day culture, largely in the UK,'
sort of contemporary folk culture, if you like.'
And it also makes me think a lot--'
I know I was at a conversation in the UK'
with the arts minister at the time, Ed Vaizey.'
And it was a roundtable discussion'
about a new kind of arts paper.
And someone raised the point about going out'
into an area where there was no culture,'
a shit area with no culture.
And I just got so angry with this person.'
Because it was like, how dare you say that?'
How dare you use that term to someone else's community?"
And it reminds me, I was doing a transcription'
of a series of interviews with managers of Sure Start centers'
in the UK, which are basically sort of early learning centers.'
And one of the managers saying she'
has these very in-depth conversations'
with young mothers who are white, working-class mothers,'
who say, I wish I was Indian because my Indian friends,'
they've got culture.
They've got saris.
They have delicious food.
And we don't have that.
I have no culture.
And the manager of this early learning center'
is like, what are you talking about?'
Of course you do.
You have a ritual of tea whenever'
someone enters your house.
You have your birthday celebrations.'
You just need to learn the visual material,'
the culture, the everyday culture that you inhabit.'
And you need to learn how to recognize that.'
And so going back to the start of the point,'
I think the ability then of certain artists'
or practitioners to focus those lenses and say, oh, yeah,'
I never thought that that thing that I did was culture'
or was valuable.
I think that can be an amazing virtue and joy of some'
of this type of work.
Yeah.
And to elaborate on that.
In Flint, where we are that shit area that they say'
has no culture.
And when the plants left and half of the residents'
left, and they left all of these empty homes that'
are vacant and left to go through the process'
of gentrification so they can cleanse the city--'
she's right about the lense.
I have to go into each neighborhood.'
And my project varies with each neighborhood,'
because I engage community.
And I say, what is your culture?
And they say, what?
We're black, or we're this or we're that?"
No, no, that's who you are.
Your culture is what you do, the rituals that you have.'
It's how you live.
It's how you enjoy.
It's how you celebrate.
And so I say, what is your flavor?'
Well, they've got a lot of flavor."
Oh, we do this.
We do that.
That's their culture.
And I focus a lens on that.
And I bring it out through the murals that we do.'
And I say, OK, this is the flavor of this neighborhood.'
And that mural is the culture of that area.'
Even though we're one people--
We're all American-- there's little microcosms of culture."
Maybe it's with these three houses."
Maybe it's with this block.
Maybe it's with this whole neighborhood."
Maybe it's with this community.
But you have to be that lens that says, I see you,'
and I hear you.
And that validates them.
So when talking about developing culture'
or identifying those cultures that'
exist in those neighborhoods, how'
do you find that balance between that culture'
attracting more development, and with that,'
gentrification, and then killing that culture that was vibrant'
and then this full circle that goes over and over?'
Well, actually, we just remind them of where they came from'
and remind them of what their culture was.'
And then we also put up there what it was'
and what it has turned into.
Because it's always evolving.
When these people move in and these people move out,'
it changes.
At one time, this was a predominantly white'
neighborhood that ended up going black.'
And then it ended up going empty.'
And then it ended up going abandoned.'
But still, there are still spots of that culture.'
And you just have to say, when they forget what it was,'
remind them of who they are.
And it's still there.
So you deal with it as it comes.
And it's fluid.
And you have to know that it's organic"
and it's going to change and you can't keep it that way."
It is what it is.
I think that's kind of key is that there's"
an undertone to some of the gentrification conversation'
that actually what you want to do'
is keep things in total stasis.
And I think like things will change.'
And I think, for me, the bigger question is,'
who benefits from those changes, and how,'
through the structure of the work'
and the creation of organizations,'
or the impact of the work, you can share benefits more widely,'
rather than aim for a stasis, which is self-defeating.'
And a lot of these areas have real social problems'
that do need investment.
And where there's investments, there"
is going to be a change and gentrification.'
And trying to stop it completely is a losing game.'
So it's more like, how do you reframe it?"
How do you share the benefits?
How do you change--
And I guess that's where that question also of capital"
and economy comes in and how you start--'
the culture is a way of also people seeing value and seeing'
agency in what they're doing.
And also, it enables them to take on ownership.'
And it is a kind of pride thing that'
also means that when changes do come,'
people are much better able to take control of it,'
rather than just be victims of it.'
I think it's almost just like changing"
the narrative about what the value relative values are'
can have a huge impact on that process.'
And you also have to explain to them what process is going on,'
because when they're in it, they don't"
see that it's gentrification until you explain it to them."
You say, this is the process that's going on."
And you can't be outside here, saying,"
we're getting mowed over.
You have to actually go to the table.'
You have to have a seat at the table'
before they can give you a plate.'
So if you're not part of the process, if you don't"
get into the meetings with those people,'
go to your city meetings and tell them what to do,'
empower them to be at that table so that they don't get mowed"
over, they don't get lost.
Because it's investment in people."
And the big businesses they have the money, or the schools'
or whoever is doing the process of gentrification,'
they don't want to be labeled as the villain."
You put that Snidely Whiplash hat on them,'
and all of a sudden, they change.'
Oh, no, no, we want you.
We want you here.
So you tell them how to get a seat at the table,'
because change is never done from the outside.'
It's done from the inside.
Sorry.
I had a slight aside, but partly because I'
feel like maybe there's a strand of the conversation which"
is about, if you like, going into a context'
and doing a project.
And I think, for me, it's also very personal."
It's like I've benefited from many public art projects."
So I've benefited from access to the arts"
throughout my whole life.
And for me, that's so much another dimension of how"
I see the world and an ability to feel like I can understand'
and engage with the world of visual and material'
culture, which is such an important element of this world'
we're in that is full of images and I"
think is really underrepresented in our education systems.'
And actually, to go back to where'
Paul's talk ended on moments of ambiguity or moments of joy--"
I remember the first time when I went to a project in the UK'
that was done by Artangel, which is sort of similar.'
It's a UK production company, which was in--"
the Round House, in the '90s, which was a big train shed,"
which is now an arts venue.
But it was before it had been renovated.'
And they'd filled the whole space"
with a white bouncy castle.
I think it was by Michael Landy.
I had no idea.
I was, like, eight years old.
I only discovered this many, many years later.'
But I remember that sort of surreal moment'
and that joy that can come with something like that, just'
the ability to experience the city differently,'
to feel like, it's yeah, this open-ended, malleable thing,"
and as a child, what that feels like.'
And then when you talk about your project with the keys'
to the city, there are no concrete outcomes.'
It's going to be very hard to tick a box on a form."
But actually, these things make a difference,'
and they're cumulative.
And I think they do enrich all of our experiences of the built'
environment.
I mean, just to say one thing about the gentrification thing.'
It's a tricky little wicket.
I mean, I think it is good to always be'
strategic in terms of context.
And New York City, for example, is very different than Flint'
in terms of the speed of urbanism,'
how much speculative capital's out there"
for development and stuff.
So I mean, I say that because when we did that Weeksville'
project, it was really crazy, because there's"
a sad part to that story, which was'
just that this is in a neighborhood called'
Bedford-Stuyvesant.
It's on the border of Bed-Stuy and Crown Heights."
And I think it's really important"
to bring up these sites of black self-determination.'
But as we were doing community organizing, I mean,'
everybody in the neighborhood was'
basically like, it's a done deal, like it's done."
While we are working with them, the place'
of Josephine English's historic home,"
the guy who owned the building was just'
looking for the highest bidder while we're working with him."
And when Weeksville actually had the city'
pay for a LEEDS-certified, giant architectural building,'
they literally did the ribbon-cutting'
while we were doing the opening of the show'
and had to fire the entire staff and had a staff of two people.'
So they had literally brand new computers,'
state-of-the-art everything.
But of course, the city gives no money to actual operating'
expenses, but they pat themselves'
on the back for helping this civic organization.'
But of course, they got no funding for this organization'
on the operating level.
But it seemed to me it was almost this structural racism.'
In certain kind of hyper-developed moments,'
you have-- to have a certain kind of--'
I don't know what it is.
It felt like that Waiting for Godot project,'
like you almost have to have an almost epic, existential sense'
of like irony and tragedy at the same time,'
because it is hard to confront that kind of shit, man,'
in the neighborhoods.
The mayors, nobody in the city can stand up to it.'
The mayor can't.
De Blasio runs on a platform of like,'
we're going to stop the developers."
You see how that went.
So I just think when an arts organization--'
it's a tough thing.
And I also don't want to lie to ourselves about it"
in certain places.
When I worked in North Adams, they wanted gentrification'
and still do.
They're like, hey, I would take any business."
And it's a different narrative.
So I do think it's important to be"
contextual about the political economy fights'
that you're dealing with.
And it's tough for me too because with Creative Time,"
you want to address these issues.'
But sometimes I do the math in my head,'
and there's some really bad math that's coming down."
You know?
Yeah, sometimes I tell the residents in the area--'
I'm like, it's going to happen.
It's going to happen.
They're going to come in here, and you're going to be gone."
This is life.
Life isn't fair.
This is truth.
So what we do is we shine a light, the brightest'
light we can, for as long as you're here."
And that's all we can do.
So we're a bit over time.
But I just wanted to ask one last question'
to do with your book, which is dealing with these very'
hot topics of the way that culture is almost at war'
with us and our society and being'
used as a tool of propaganda.
And at the same time, there are these forces'
that are trying to use culture for liberation.'
And it's striking in your talking"
about the curatorial work at Creative Time.'
One would think that as a social-political activist,'
you would be doing more confrontational work,'
or trying to promote more provocations.'
But actually, the way that you're talking about it"
sounds more like community building and mediation'
or softening the effect of cultures.'
So can you talk about that?
Well, first of all, I got to say--'
Bernie Sanders almost won.
And there's no Bernie Sanders without Occupy Wall"
There's no Bernie Sanders without Black Lives Matter."
There's no Bernie Sanders without Standing Rock."
So just to say, when people say social movements don't"
have impact, they totally do.
And when people say, oh, what did'
the artists relate to social movements, everybody--'
it's all cultural producers in these things now."
Culture-making and social movements are very ingrained.'
And I say that to go to your point, because I do'
think the slow work of social building'
and social producing alternative visions of a future'
is having effects.
Like, I see it in the political discourse'
that we are experiencing today.
As much as Trump's in office, there"
is also a very progressive challenge'
to overarching neoliberal capital that'
is being articulated globally in country to country to country.'
And it's well long overdue.
But I think it's important in these moments with Trump"
there to remind ourselves of some progress.'
Whatever you feel about Bernie, I'm just saying,"
there is a vision that is much more specifically talking'
about capitalism, that says the word "socialism," that'
talks about an ability to combat flagrant speculative money'
running the world.
That is being articulated in a very profound way.'
And I do credit a lot of this culture,'
socially-engaged do-gooder stuff as a part'
of the ecosystem that is producing'
a global collective subjectivity.'
That is out there.
So I think it's OK.
Jeff Chang wrote this really great book.'
I forget what it's called, it's like Who We Be or something."
But he talked about culture-making being part'
of a wave.
And no water molecule see how it plays in the wave.'
Right?
But we are all part of a bigger push.'
And it's slower than direct push sometimes."
And I think that's OK, because I feel it."
I feel it.
I feel it.
I feel it in everything.
I think it's good to have moments of hope,"
because right now, I think we're all"
realizing this dude's literally in office for a while."
[LAUGHS]
All right.
On that note--
[LAUGHTER]
Thanks.
Thank you, Nato.
[APPLAUSE]
