Good evening.
I think we should get going so we have'
enough time for discussion.
Good evening and thank you for being here'
for this keynote talk that would kick off a conference, slums,'
new visions for enduring global phenomena.'
And I welcome you here on behalf of the Lincoln Land Institute'
and the Joint Center for Housing Studies'
and the Graduate School of Design.'
And I hope you'll also come for the next two days"
for the conference.
And before I go on to introduce our keynote speaker, Ranjani'
Mazumdar, I want to quickly thank'
Dr. George McCarthy, known as Mac,'
president and CEO of the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy,'
and Dr. Chris Herbert, who is the managing'
director of the Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies,'
for having facilitated and supported this effort'
and made the GSD a partner in this process.'
For me personally, these are important efforts'
that I believe create true interdisciplinary conversations'
around really wicked problems that we face globally.'
And it has really been an educative process'
to be part of the discussion in evolving'
a format and thrust for a symposium such as this one.'
Dr. Enrique Silva from the Lincoln Land Institute,'
who also teaches here at the GSD, Alejandro Mazarro, David--'
there are many others who you will see and hear'
from in the next few days through the conference.'
And lastly, I want to thank Diane Davis, the chair'
of the Urban Planning and Design Department'
for having supported this, and our dean, Mohsen Mostafavi, Ken'
and Paige for making available the piper'
for this inaugural session, and also'
including this as part of the formal GSD lecture series.'
This symposium is about taking perhaps one'
of the most enduring problems on the planet,'
perhaps aside from climate change,'
and exposing ourselves to new frames of reference'
and developing new lenses to inform our approach'
to the global and systemic challenges that'
produce patterns of sociospatial poverty.'
Of course, there's been much discussion about slums."
And even the use of the word slums, we really deliberated.'
Because the word slum has a longer and more continuous'
history of usage and reference that has perhaps'
made it more enduring than the more recent four,'
five decade-old use of the word informal, which also,'
in my view, sets up an unproductive binary sometimes,'
at least from a sociospatial planning and design'
perspective.
And I just wanted to make that point here'
in the design school.
In fact, Francis [? linea, ?] who also taught'
here, doesn't even use the word slums"
because he feels that's a generalization."
He uses the word shantytowns and it's cultural invention"
as a phenomenon.
And so I think the usage of these words'
is something we are going to deliberate to perhaps come up'
with a more constructive, productive,'
and instrumental narrative.
I mean, you know, if you look up the dictionary,'
the slum is a squalid, overcrowded, urban street,'
distinctly habited, very often by poor people, hovel, ghetto,'
shantytown favela, Jhuggi-Jhopri, bustee,'
cabbagetown, rookery--
many, many such suggestions, but off the physical state'
of a place, of settlement, its material and condition.'
And of course, used as a verb, slumming it out--'
that means spending time at a lower social level'
than one's own through curiosity or a charitable purpose."
So it's used in different contexts."
And informal, which is off the record, unauthorized,'
unsanctioned, confidential, unconfirmed, et cetera,'
also has great potency.
The word slum clearly is directed'
towards physical and material existence of a habitat.'
So in this context, I think we must understand that cities'
are a set of disparities between the intentions of formal modes'
of practice and their spatial manifestation on the ground,'
thus perhaps no one category is really adequate'
to describe this phenomena in the world today.'
You know, I often hear in the design school--'
I'd like to share this.
Marc Angelil, who is a professor at the ETH,'
once shared with me their big project on Ethiopia.'
And it was a project that was incredibly well-funded.'
And they were looking at informal settlements.'
And so they took 20 students, got a bus,'
spent two days identifying an informal settlement,'
spent eight days mapping it--
photo montage, measure drawings.
And they kept the last day for interviews.'
Now social scientists would have done exactly the opposite.'
And so after they finished their incredible documentation,'
in the second interview, they discovered it was actually'
a formal settlement.
It only looked like an informal setting.'
[laughter]
And so I just want to say this in a design school'
because the aesthetic question also'
becomes a very important one.
And the baggage we carry of that lens of aesthetics'
is also highly problematic sometimes.'
And I hope we can together peel away'
some of these layers in our discussions.'
So we have oscillated between the word informal slums.'
And like I said, in my own understanding,'
it encodes the physical condition.'
And formality is the process of becoming and operating.'
And so if you look at governance and claims and modes'
of citizenship and many other political questions,'
informal, of course, is a much, much more productive category.'
And so there is this continuing tension'
that we have to somehow resolve, because they are intrinsically'
linked.
And often, the discussions around these terms'
are nonproductive because we unintendingly'
inflate one or the other more often and then sometimes'
use them interchangeably.
We've also focused on slums because these spaces,"
for all our three institutions involved,'
challenge our usual notions of housing,'
land occupation processes, as well as urban form'
and urbanism more broadly, versus the making and imagining'
of the ideal manifestation that we all aspire to,'
which is to say that the formal city also produces slums.'
Slums really present a compelling vision'
that potentially allows us to better understand'
the blurred lines of contemporary urbanism'
and the changing roles of people in spaces in urban societies.'
In this context, an architecture or urbanism'
of equality in an increasingly inequitable economic condition'
requires looking deeper to find a wide range of places'
to mark and commemorate the cultures of those'
who most often are excluded from the spaces or architecture'
and urban form of global flows.
And the camera, as our keynote speaker, Ranjani, has argued,'
has the ability to penetrate those lives'
in these otherwise marginalized spaces which'
are hard to present in any other abstract terms or form.'
Cinema, she argues, is not an institutionalized medium'
and thus is not taken seriously as a scholarly enterprise'
in its form.
And it is for this reason that we'
choose to begin our symposium through the lens of film.'
Ranjani Mazumdar is a professor of cinema studies'
at the School of Art and Aesthetics'
at the Jawaharlal Nehru Institute, JNU,'
as as it's called.
Her publications focus on urban culture, popular cinema,'
gender, and cinematic city.
She's the author of Bombay Cinema an Archive"
of the City, which she did in 2007,'
and co-editor of a forthcoming a Wiley Blackwell'
Companion to Indian Cinema.
Her writings have appeared in anthologies as well'
as journals, such as Bioscope, Continuum, Screen, Social'
Research, Journal of Television and New Media, et cetera--'
very widely published.
She has been a European Union fellow in the on Indian films'
at the University of Westminster in London,'
a fellow at the Davis Center of Historical Studies at Princeton'
University, a British Academy fellow, a fellow in Paris,'
visiting faculty at the Department of Cinema Studies'
at New York University, and several other such positions.'
She has also worked as a documentary filmmaker.'
And her productions include Delhi Diary 2001'
and the Power of the Image, which she has co-directed.'
Ranjani's body of work and practice"
speaks about cinema's ability to both blur and perpetuate"
the formal versus informal binary'
that has become a definite element in the approaches'
to the enduring global phenomenon of slums.'
What can be said about the complexity of contested space,'
where thousands, even millions of other individuals'
are staking their own claims?
How does one even begin to frame the issue'
without simplifying it?
Perhaps cinema offers us a point of entry.'
Cinematic creative projects have the ability'
to blur the boundaries and prevent us'
from realizing concrete and fixed assumptions'
about the world.
What if we understand the informal city and the slums'
that produce as the expression and representation'
of the unrealized aspirations of the formal city?'
How might this lens inform our understanding of the broader'
visual landscape as another space where the most'
extreme have-nots lack agency?
To work in the contested space of slums,'
we must recognize is a political choice.'
When we examine the role, for example today,'
of doctored videos and fake news items which'
have played a major role in fueling'
the flames of our current political climate,'
we recognize the power of the visual'
to blur or sharpen boundaries of privilege and power.'
Such a reality became explicitly clear to our speaker'
in recent years.
Since February, 2016, the students and teachers'
at the JNU university where Ranjani is a professor'
have been at the receiving end of extremely hostility'
by the Indian National government, the BJP.'
The president of the students' union, Kanhaiya Kumar,"
was arrested and charged with sedition'
for supposedly shouting anti-national slogans'
at an event on Kashmir.
Six other students were arrested.'
These events led to countrywide protests, political debates'
in parliament, heated discussions on issues related'
to nationalism, patriotism, the freedom of expression,'
and the laws related to this.
Teachers say the ecosystem of the university,'
known for its liberal views and culture of political activism,'
is in a fragile state of existence.'
Teachers went on a hunger strike.'
And there have been all sorts of protests.'
Here in most of the academy in the United States,'
we are privileged and hard to imagine'
that, for example, an institution like Harvard,'
for example, coming under some similar fire, where'
our daily lives are not impinged on in complicated ways.'
Perhaps not-- maybe we are close to that.'
But when our voices are suppressed,'
how do we keep integrity?
Can we also think about and be aware'
of our academic environment as another space'
where slums are defined, not by their inhabitants,'
but by experts, practitioners, and scholars,'
and what does this mean is something I think'
we should also be aware of.
What are the aesthetic decisions we'
make as designers and professional policymakers'
and academics when asked to represent the space'
and define what we call slums?
And I think this is the type of dialectic space'
that we hope the symposium will foster.'
The keynote lecture will be followed by a discussion, which'
will involve Janice Perlman and [? brodwyn ?] Fischer,'
responding to the lecture and then a discussion moderated'
by Mac, George McCarthy, who is the president and the CEO'
of the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy here in Cambridge,'
Massachusetts.
The Lincoln Institute seeks to improve the quality of life'
through effective use, taxation, stewardship of land.'
He will tell us more about the institution and its work'
in the coming days.
But as a short intro, what I would say'
is Mac is well-known for his blunt and honest views'
and his ability to challenge as well as inspire those'
he works with.
He has long seen land use policy as a means'
to reach gritty goals.
He's worked for his role as a teacher, researcher,"
and funder.
He will introduce the respondents'
after the keynote lecture.
And with that, I invite Professor Ranjani Mazumdar'
to deliver her keynote lecture titled, The Cinematic Slum.'
Thank you.
[applause]
Thank you very much, Rahul, for the introduction'
to the symposium and to my own work.'
I feel honored to have got this invitation to kickstart'
a symposium like this.
And I hope I can provoke some new types of questions'
with what I have to say today.
And I will not waste much time and begin immediately,'
because we want to stick to a tight schedule.'
The slum has been a visual force in a number of city films'
from across the world.
The use of certain geographical locations in popular discourses'
about crime and poverty have given shape'
to a diverse range of images that'
are at once powerful, mythic, and disturbing.'
I would like to present today an account of some'
of the perceptions that have fueled the imagination'
of the cinematic slum.
Let me start with the discussion of the planetary consciousness'
at work and some of the literature on slums'
and then trace its relationship to photographic and cinematic'
forms.
As I will show, this planetary vision, often influenced'
by certain kinds of urban plans, policies,'
and academic discourses, translates'
into an aerial imagination.
These aerial views are, however, constantly threatened'
by an overspill of challenging images that foreground'
a dense slum ecology.
Whether exploitative, sensational,'
or prone to accusations of poverty porn,'
the range of cinematic images offered'
a hyper-sensory encounter with the world of the slum.'
These encounters rely on certain techniques that'
are unique to cinema and therefore provide'
an alternative form of knowledge that'
is different from sociological, historical,'
and economic accounts of slums.
I hope to focus particularly on the visceral, violent,'
and embodied forms of experiences'
that the cinematic slum has become known for.'
In his book, Planet of the Slums,'
Mike Davis presents us with an apocalyptic account'
of a future overwhelmed by the expansion of slums.'
Large-scale migration to the cities'
has resulted in congested spaces.'
And the slum is now a fait accompli.'
While slums have been a presence in most cities of the world'
in the second half of the 20th century,'
the global south has increasingly'
witnessed a concentration of squatter settlements.'
Davis's account is powerful.
It makes us sit up with a sense of shock'
and asks us to understand the power of statistics and data'
that he parades for the reader.
The whirlwind of staggering information'
is meant to shake us out of our reverie,'
to recognize a crisis that is at once economic, social,'
political, and ecological.
The cover of the book provides us'
with a high angle view of a Brazilian favela.'
A decade after the publication of Davis's book, Johnny Miller,"
in his award-winning photographic work'
titled Unequal Scenes, captured aerial views of inequality.'
Miller started work initially in South Africa'
but soon branched out in 2016 to use'
drones for the capture of striking images'
from around the world.
These images provide high angle views of major cities,'
with dense clusters of low-income housing set'
against the wealthier districts.
The countries where Miller took pictures'
include South Africa, India, Tanzania, the United States,'
and Kenya.
The desire to generate these high angle images'
came to Miller during his time as an anthropology student'
in South Africa.
He was struck by the tin shacks and their existence'
right next to the affluent neighborhoods.'
Says Miller, and I quote, "The images'
that I find the most powerful are'
when the camera is looking straight down what's"
known as nadir view, looking at the actual borders'
between rich and poor.
Sometimes this is a fence, sometimes a road or wetlands,'
with small shacks of poor houses on one side'
and larger houses or mansions on the other.'
Whatever it is about the composition'
of those photographs, they are extremely powerful to people.'
I think the images make inequality relevant.'
People can see themselves reflected in the images.'
And it\'s deeply unsettling," end of quote.'
There is an uncanny resemblance in Davis's account"
in the Planet of Slums and Miller's photographs"
in his Unequal Scenes.
Both capture broad trends in the world'
and focus on scale, numbers, and the desire'
to instill a sense of shock.
There is something powerful in this spectacle of inequality.'
And it is hard to ignore it.
The issue, however, is the deployment of a distanced gaze,'
both in the book and in the photographs.'
This distance is created by an aerial perspective,'
a planetary view, so to speak, which'
recognizes an essential interconnectedness'
between all humankind and the earth,'
a relationship that transcends nations to foreground a shared'
vision of a united humanity.
The aerial view popularized since the experience of flight'
is now a widespread form and has deeply'
affected the way we understand geography and territory.'
While aerial photography has been constructively deployed'
in the service of war, cartography,'
and archaeological surveys, we need'
to understand how this form of vision'
emerged so strongly as a cultural phenomenon.'
In the course of its history, the aerial view'
has offered us the fantasy of visual possession'
of vast space.
Since this form of looking is distinctly'
different from ground level perception,'
there is a quality of abstraction'
that comes into play in any high angle view of the world.'
What we experience is a move away'
from a complex and contradictory reality to an image form'
where the unruly and the untidy appear tidy.'
This is a process where eyesores seen at ground level'
get transformed through aerial vision'
into striking forms of spectacle.'
Complex social context, lived realities, and experiences'
are reduced to a planar spatiality'
that instills a generalized notion of the universal.'
Davis's book has been classified as urban crisis writing"
by Ravi Sundaram, an apocalyptic imagination that'
seems to steer clear from the complexities that exist'
inside the slums themselves.
Miller's photographs seem to carry Davis's ideas"
into his striking account of inequality seen from above.'
These descriptions, however, do not obviously'
capture the concrete experiences of the slums' inhabitants."
As against Davis's apocalyptic imagination,"
we do also have other perspectives that'
have documented not just the concrete realities'
and experiences of those living in slums,'
but also provided access to the infrastructures'
of the informal economies that operate in these locations.'
The effort in these micro accounts'
has been to trace patterns as well as distinct differences,'
to understand the diverse context of slum worlds,'
the way they look, operate, and survive.'
There are many examples of this kind of work.'
In Shadow Cities, Robert Neuwirth'
provides narratives of ordinary slum dwellers.'
For two years, he explored slums in four continents.'
And despite their world of poverty, despair,'
and political corruption, he experienced a great deal'
of the human spirit.
The book has a strong tone of hope.'
And squatters are presented as entrepreneurs'
who cope by staying outside of the asphalt'
world, the term used by them to refer'
to the streets and political system of the legal city.'
The book takes us to a sense of community,'
a place of friendship and bonds, and a highly productive life.'
In some ways, these two opposing tendencies'
of expressing the expansive horror'
of the slum experience via numbers'
and statistical classification and the search'
for a spirited community of residents engaged'
in informal networks of the economy'
has framed the popular dynamics of slum representations.'
In the cinematic world, however, this narrative'
becomes complicated.
Danny Boyle's Slumdog Millionaire, released in 2008,"
became a major success across the world with its rags'
to riches story.
Based on a novel, the primary structure of the narrative'
moves between a popular television game show,'
How to be a Millionaire, and memories'
of one of the contestants, Jamal, a Muslim boy'
who grew up in Bombay slums.
Just before the final round, when'
he is about to win a large sum of money,'
Jamal is picked up by the police for questioning'
because the host of the show can't believe"
a boy from the slum could possibly'
know all the answers to the questions asked in the show.'
The narrative does not try to be plausible or believable,'
for the focus clearly was to find a language with which'
to convey the memory of growing up in Bombay's slums."
The film was both controversial as well as appealing.'
There is a desire to penetrate the density of Bombay's slum"
world, to access sensory fabric.
Boyle deploys a cinematic language of encounters'
to explore the networks of the slum,'
to narrate the stories of two brothers,'
yet the labyrinthine structure of the space'
defies any easy access to a totalizing view.'
A key issue for us here is that of navigation'
since it is in the world of cinema'
that we have seen the most sustained desire to move'
into these spaces, to trade on various kinds'
of spectatorial experiences of fear, excitement, voyeurism,'
and thrill.
This is absolutely central to the way the idea of the slum'
has become enmeshed in our thinking of certain kinds'
of urban spaces that we do not always know well'
but have only heard of or learned'
about via a global production of pictures and documents, news'
reporting, literature, and cinema.'
This indeed is what makes the slum iconography so'
difficult to establish, since its so-called authentic life is'
now no longer available outside this blitzkrieg'
of visual production.
Slums are diverse architecturally, socially,'
in terms of infrastructure, and in terms'
of the geographical locations within urban spaces.'
They are mysterious, always around'
but never fully understood.
So the techniques used by cinema have'
tended to play with the nature of the medium itself.'
Giuliana Bruno refers to film as a form of modern cartography,'
where we can clearly see connections'
between space and emotion.
Forms of mobility deployed by cinema'
usually take us across time and space'
to invoke a unique map of filmic affect.'
Slumdog revels in this kind of expressivity.'
The opening sequence in the film uses'
the chase, a popular device in cinema,'
to navigate Mumbai slums.
Boyle takes us to Dharavi as the site for the story to unfold.'
Dharavi is one of the largest slums in Asia'
and houses around 700,000 people.'
It is a complex space, a site of high productivity,'
poor infrastructure, outsourced labor, and global networks.'
Within this space, many different lives co-exist.'
And not all of these stories are captured by Boyle in Slumdog,'
and yet it is what he captures that is'
of particular significance for us'
to understand how a narrative of embodied knowledge'
is presented as a distinctly different imagination'
from the planetary consciousness at work in Davis'
and Miller's work.
If the high angle drone imagery that we have just seen'
seeks to generate abstract spectacles of shock,'
Boyle assaults our senses with a form of visual cartography'
to invoke the ecology of Mumbai's slums."
[video playback]
[non-english singing]
- Jamal, [non-english], Jamal.
Jamal, [non-english].
[airplane noise]
[yelling]
-
- [non-english speech]
- [non-english speech]
- [non-english speech]
[children yelling]
[music playing]
[non-english singing]
[children yelling]
[non-english singing]
[screaming]
[non-english singing]
[yelling]
[non-english singing]
[music - "o, saya"]
- (SINGING) They can't touch me.
We break off, run so fast, they can't even touch me."
Been that gypsy.
Touch me.
I'll show you gypsy my zig-zag quickly."
Pick up that pack on my journey.
Don't suddenly start to follow me."
I am in luck.
Some days they suck when we live for the buck.'
We get for the family.
One day, I'm wanna to be a star, where I get to hang in a bar."
I'll go to Vegas with the playas just to forget my stars."
- Hey, what?
- Sorry.
Sorry.
Sorry, [non-english].
- [non-english]
- [non-english].
Sorry.
Sorry.
[music - "o, saya"]
- (SINGING) They can't touch me.
We break off, run so fast, they can't even touch me."
Been that gypsy.
Touch me, I show you gypsy my zig-zag quickly.'
- [non-english speech]
[end playback]
The sequence starts with a dynamic view of an airport'
track, the hazy apartment block skyline, the impish playfulness'
of the children, to finally enter the streets and bylanes'
of Dharavi as the children get chased by a police constable.'
The chase is superbly crafted, an energetic run'
that reveals various aspects of the space to us.'
Yet this is a form of mapping that'
foregrounds the bodily experiences of the children'
and their deft navigation across rooftops, alleys,'
water pipes, and staircases.
The constable finds it difficult to negotiate the space.'
The children, on the other hand, have a relationship of play'
as Boyle edits their speedy movement to music.'
We see the slum as a space with giant pipes,'
sewage, blue-colored plastic floating in water,'
narrow alleys, and a combination of tin and thatched roofs.'
The two kids really know their way around'
as the director moves from ground level'
to the high angle shot showing the thatched roofs.'
This play between the high and the low'
is interesting since up close, we get a sense of the slum'
as we blur through the alleys.
This is typical for any chase sequence,'
since its attempt is always to capture a sensorium'
and thrill of movement through what'
appears to be very dense space.
Through this opening sequence, we'
are provided access to a form of spatial knowledge'
that children possess.
A similar controversy about the sensational nature of the film'
shadowed Fernando Meirelles's City of God, released in 2002."
City of God is based on a true story'
set in 1960s Rio based on a best selling novel'
by Paulo Lins, who grew up in a favela.'
The narrative moves between the '60s and the '80s"
and follows the different journeys of the two'
protagonists, Li'l Ze, a dreaded teenage gangster, and Rocket,"
another teenager who wants to become a photographer to escape'
the favela.
The story unfolds from the point of view of Rocket.'
City of God adopted a style that relentlessly pummels'
the spectator with a tale of drugs,'
crime, and corruption located inside the favelas.'
It is intriguing how the opening of the film'
opens with a similar cartographic impulse'
as Slumdog but with a distinctly violent edge to it.'
[video playback]
[chicken clucking]
- Fuck, the chicken's got away.
Go after that chicken, man.
Go on, for fuck's sake.
[laughs]
- If it's a good photo, I'll get a job at the paper."
- You think so, Rocket?
- Gotta take the risk.
- You'd risk your life for a picture?"
Forget it.
- You think I want to meet up with that motherfucking hood?'
- Get that chicken, bro.
[chicken clucking]
- Motherfucker, I told you to grab that chicken.'
Outta my way, Get that chicken!
[laughs]
[background voices]
[gunshots]
- If Li'l Ze catches you, he'll kill you."
- Yeah, well, he's got to find me first."
- Hey, kid.
Get that chicken.
Get that chicken!
- Shit, the cops.
- Don't fucking run off.
Give me that.
Hey, melonhead, you fucking fag.
- A picture could change my life, but in the City of God,'
if you run away, they get you.
And if you stay, they get you, too.'
- They're coming for us.
- It's been that way ever since I was a kid."
[end playback]
The significance of both these sequences'
lies in their attempt to carve out'
a mediatized imagination for a discussion of slums'
in a globalized world.
Both films deal with the metamorphosis of childhood.'
This focus on childhood is not unknown in the history'
of world cinema.
And yet there is something different about films'
like City of God and Slumdog.
A brief comparison with certain depictions'
available from an earlier era may help to shed light on this.'
Hector Babenco's Pixote, released"
in 1981, and Mira Nair's Salaam Bombay, released in 1988,"
are two iconic films of the 1980s.'
Both films on childhood experiences of poverty'
were inspired by the Mexican film'
Los Olvidados, which translates as The Young and the Damned,'
directed by Luis.
Bunuel in 1959.
In each of these films, the slum is the master narrative'
that is never overtly present in its architectural density'
but is the infrastructural condition for the way'
that children experience life.
Mira Nair's Salaam Bombay deals with the lives"
of street children.
Shot in the slums of Bombay, the film'
shows the story of Krishna, a 10-year-old boy who'
works for a traveling circus but is'
abandoned when the employers move away abruptly.'
He then heads for Bombay and gets'
a job working as a tea boy.
The film centers on Krishna's daily deliveries"
to a brothel and the assortment of characters'
he meets over there.
Salaam Bombay builds on a sentimental narrative,'
with the child retaining an intrinsically human quality'
that remains untouched by his circumstances.'
The film refrains from any direct articulation'
of physical aggression.
There are intimations of potential violence,'
but we don't see them on screen.
And the desire to hold onto some [? originally ?]'
sense of innocence or absolute truth'
remains the dominant emotional texture of the narrative.'
Many critics and viewers have compared Nair's venture"
to Babenco's Pixote, released earlier in the decade."
As abandoned cast-offs, the children of Pixote'
live by their wits on the cruel streets of Sao Paulo in Brazil.'
Their survival depends on the trading of sex and drugs'
as the narrative takes us through a series of events'
that act upon the children.
Unlike Salaam Bombay, there is something relentlessly brutal'
in Pixote.
It's like being in a no-exit world, where not"
even the cleverest of the children can survive.'
A sense of desperation runs through the narrative'
with absolutely no hope available for the children.'
We are made to view a cataloging of strange atrocities, where'
beauty is forever doomed and a sense of entrapment'
emerges as the dominant emotion.
Babenco takes an ironic approach to the aerial view'
by opening the film with a straightforward introduction'
to the film's context.
[video playback]
- [speaking spanish]
[end playback]
This opening, however, has little'
to do with the series of devastating brutalities'
we witness in the rest of the narrative.'
The opening introduces us to a broader context with statistics'
and a wide angle frame of the slum.'
For the rest of the narrative, the actual slum disappears.'
This is a sequence from the reform'
school, where Pixote is sent.
[video playback]
[voice on radio]
[dog barking]
- Drawn up by President Figueiredo'
and on the bond of friendship which unites'
Brazil and Uruguay.
- Violence on the streets of Sao Paolo increases daily.'
At dawn, the body of LCB was found.'
He had been missing for two weeks.'
The director of the institute explained to our reporters.'
- Fights are frequent between the children,'
mostly due to their social background.'
Concerning the boy who was found dead,'
I have been informed that he had been brutally beaten up'
by one of his colleagues and that the attacker has'
been identified.
- His assailant, a minor, has a police record'
of armed robbery, assault, and one homicide,'
a typical juvenile delinquent.
- I don't know.
I really don't know.
I went and he wasn't there.
They told me he had run away.
Then they told me he was in the infirmary.'
Then a boy told me that was a lie,'
that the police had got him.
I don't know who's to blame.
[crying] I just want my son.
I think this institution's pretty mysterious."
The boy's mother saw it.
And I did see the boy in a terrible state.'
He couldn't have taken a step.
How could he have run away?
- It's enough.
Everyone to bed.
[end playback]
Notice how the media here is a mediator between a public world'
and the reform school.
The film's context of corruption, violence, and crime"
is a threat the children begin to understand after they hear'
this telecast on television.
It is ironic that the boy who played Pixote, Fernando Ramos'
da Silva, went back to the streets after the film'
was over and was ultimately killed'
by police bullets in 1987.
In Los Olvidados, the film that influenced both Salaam Bombay'
and Pixoote, the opening sequence'
introduces us to the port of New York,'
the island of Manhattan with its skyscrapers,'
the Eiffel Tower in Paris, Big Ben in London,'
and then downtown Mexico City.
Bunuel's vision is informed by a healthy holism"
for whom poverty and the poor are'
shown in the unrefined reality of urban misery.'
[video playback]
- The great modern cities, New York, Paris, London,'
hide behind their magnificent buildings'
homes of misery that shelter malnourished children,'
without hygiene, without schools, a harvest'
of future delinquency.
The society tries to correct this evil.'
But the success of its efforts is very limited.'
Only if in a near future children's"
and adolescents' rights are vindicated will they"
be useful for society.
Mexico, the great modern city, is not an exception'
to this universal rue.
That's why this film based on facts from real life"
is not optimistic.
And it leaves the solution to the problem'
to society's progressive forces.
[children playing]
[drum beating]
[end playback]
Bunuel's project was clear, a demystification"
of poverty, camera work that went'
against the usual techniques of social films.'
The film mocks its audience, savagely'
denying any space for middle class sentiments'
as it narrates the brutalized experiences of Mexico's"
urban delinquents.
The use of these postcard and aerial views in the opening'
sequence was to address a Mexican audience'
about the existence of slums everywhere.'
Bunuel here was squarely negotiating'
the anxious nationalism of third world elites'
about the global circulation of films'
depicting poverty in their country.'
Pedro, one of the protagonists in the film,'
is sent to reform school by his unfeeling mother'
for a crime he did not commit.
He escapes from there to make his way back'
to a fugitive life.
He is finally killed by his friend from the street gang'
that they were all part of.
The body is discovered by people who know Pedro.'
But fear of being implicated in the crime'
leads them to wrap him unceremoniously in a bag'
and throw him down a garbage dump.'
[video playback]
- Good evening.
- Good evening.
[dramatic music]
[playback ends]
While these three very significant films on childhood'
are distinctly different in their approach,'
together they offer a set of interventions'
on the slum child's existence.
In these slice-of-life narratives,'
events act upon the children and their bodies.'
Despite their very different styles,'
a binding element in the three films'
is the influence of Italian neorealism.'
Let me quickly describe some of the features'
of this cinematic style, which emerged'
in the context of post-war devastation in Italy'
and soon became a global debate about realism and cinema'
in the decades to follow.
Where am I?
[laughs] In the decades to follow--'
neorealists were committed to a notion'
of the everyday [inaudible].
One of its theorists, Cesare Zavattini,'
referred to it as a dailiness of people's lives."
The camera should just enter the ongoing unfolding'
of reality as a guest.
Neorealists believed in an unconditional focus'
on the present, to explore how people's actions were shaped"
by necessity and circumstances.
Real locations, street images, the use'
of nonprofessional actors, and an analytical documentary style'
became the chief characteristics of the realist mode.'
There was a belief here in the ontological wholeness'
of the reality being filmed.
They preferred the long take and depth in cinematography'
and did not appreciate the use of montage'
or any other stylization generated'
at the post-production stage.
Nair, Bunuel, and Babenco used nonprofessional actors,'
along with an overt use of many of the well-known conventions'
of Italian neorealism.
The aerial view was ironically structured'
in two of these films with a clear belief'
that observation from an externalized point of view'
was perhaps the best way to capture a sense of reality.'
Bunuel's Los Olvidados, however, played"
with surrealistic elements and remained unsentimental'
till the end.
He was clear about the role of the camera'
and did not want to express some naive'
discourse on authentic reality.
It is perhaps this film that in some ways'
offers us the entry point for a discussion'
of the hypersensory drives of both Slumdog and City of God.'
The most significant element in both films'
is the movement between past and present'
and the stylized use of flashbacks, techniques'
that neorealism did not deploy.
In both films, the children grew up.'
And the temporal play between childhood and the present'
offers an unusual instance of embodied knowledge'
that is foregrounded as a deep and felt experience,'
yet there is no fixed identity that'
emerges since we have two sets of characters'
in each film, both following different parts,'
despite a common and shared experience.'
They are not sociological types but subjects'
who approach life differently.
Close to the end of City of God, Rocket, the narrator'
of the film, is confronted with a dramatic moment when'
the police suddenly arrive and start'
to round up the gang's leaders.
Li's Ze is one of the figures who is arrested,"
only to be taken to a secluded place'
where a deal is struck for his release.'
All this is captured by Rocket on his camera.'
This is something he's able to do primarily"
because of his embodied knowledge of the space.'
Let me show you a clip first before I offer'
my thoughts on the sequence.
[video playback]
[background voices]
- Rocket, where are you going?
- I got something closer up.
[distant yelling]
[car screeching to a stop]
- OK, lovebirds.
- Come on, Li'l Ze.
Let's go settle our scores.
Not you.
you're a present for the media.
[trunk slamming]
[background voices]
[camera whirring and clicking]
[footsteps]
- Does it come to 10,000?
- Almost.
That's all I have.
- That's all there was, Chief.
- We've searched everywhere.
- Let him go.
- What about his ring?
Is it gold?
- Fill it up.
You'll owe us the rest.
[crash]
- Fucking [non-english].
[dog squealing]
[non-english]
- You're fucked, eh?
- Kids.
We'll have to do a few hold-ups to get my business going again."
- Your business, Li'l Ze?
- What's your problem, kid?
- This is for our friend, motherfucker.'
[gunshot]
A Soviet attack!
[gunfire]
- The business is ours!
[kids yelling]
[frenetic music]
[camera whir]
[playback ends]
So we see Rocket running through the favela space'
with great confidence, a maze of decrepit walls,'
unclean streets, rooftops, and garbage.'
His camera captures the backdoor deals'
between the cops and Li'l Ze.
This is immediately followed by Li'l Ze's murder"
by a rival gang of younger kids known as The Runts.'
The camera is a protagonist here precisely'
because it is in the hands of Rocket, who'
knows how to navigate the favela and draw'
on his embodied knowledge of it to get the best'
possible pictures he can.
Making the world of the favela visible'
is dependent on who is photographing it.'
Once Li'l Ze is killed, the camera"
goes into a frenzied state to finally'
show us his dead body on the ground from the point of view'
of the camera that Rocket has.
His speedy return to the site of the body this time'
is presented like an abstract blur.'
The details of the same journey made earlier'
is now rendered abstract.
Perhaps the blurred form is asking'
us to reflect on the nature of embodied experience, which'
is showcased first through Rocket's run"
to the exact location from where he can get his pictures'
and then make visible into an abstract loop.'
In Slumdog, all the answers that Jamal provides'
are drawn from his own embodied experience of life.'
In a sequence early in the film, he's"
asked a question about the god Ram.'
And we are taken to a powerful moment from his childhood.'
Jamal's mother is washing clothes inside a water tank"
at the center of the slum, her two children playing'
in the water.
Let me show you the sequence now.'
[video playback]
[train whistle]
[distant voices]
[voices fade]
- [muffled voice] Run, Jamal!
Run!
Salim, Jamal, run!
- They're Muslim.
Get them!
- Come on, Salim.
Come on.
- Jamal, let's go.
[yelling]
[baby crying]
[muffled background yelling]
- Run!
- Let's run!
[screaming]
- Hey, get lost!
Why are you standing?
Go home.
- Go, Jamal.
- Come with us.
- Wake up every morning, wishing I'
didn't know the answer to that question."
If it wasn't for Ramah and Allah,"
I would still have a mother.
[dramatic music]
[playback ends]
The sequence that we just saw begins with a high angle'
perspective with the camera panning from the trains'
to the water tank.
The public activity of bathing and fun for the children'
is suddenly interrupted by the train scene'
from Jamal's mother's point of view."
Before she sees the rioters, she displays'
an instinctive knowledge of something that appears amiss.'
She just about manages to warn her children'
before she is bludgeoned to death by the rioters.'
As the children run through the slum,'
they witness a series of events--'
the house been burnt, a man on fire, stabbing, the looting,'
and the cops sitting in their van'
with no intention of intervening to stop the riot.'
These moments are woven into the fabric of the sequence'
as the language of architecture, news photography,'
uncanny intrusions, and the children's"
bewildered expressions provide the aesthetic form'
for the expression of violence.
We then return to Jamal now in the studio,'
his face marked by a grave expression,'
a violent moment from the past vividly felt even today.'
Jamal now gets his answer right.
The specter of Ram, the reference to Allah,'
are all drawn into his complex account'
of a life seen in the slums.
As he relays his answer to the TV show,'
the spectator is made aware of the nature'
of embodied experience, felt and relayed as memory.'
In doing this, Danny Boyle is privileging the sensory world'
of the slum inhabitant and moving away'
from a realist and objectivist account of life in the slums.'
Both films offer descriptions of sites and spaces'
which are conveyed through the language of memory.'
The recognition that the catastrophes'
of the past, present, and future are'
located in the spaces of the city'
saturates the overall vision of the films.'
The shadow of death and play creates an intersection'
between memory and setting, time and place.'
Memory gives form to the city just'
as the city transforms memory.
Knowing a city well is linked also'
to childhood, the ability to play out'
the intersections between childhood impressions'
and the adult's ability to recall."
It is this interconnectedness of perspectives'
that Walter Benjamin had described so vividly'
in his reflections on childhood as a conceptual framework'
for urban memory.
The child provides a disruptive vision'
that punctures the notion of the adult's recall"
as stable and distant.
The perception of the child, in a sense,'
becomes a privileged mode of knowing.'
But it is in the fullness of time and the space of adulthood'
that meaning is achieved retrospectively.'
The significance of the past comes'
to light only in the context of a pressing present.'
It is the complex relationship between the memory'
of a particular site and the site of that particular memory'
that is of immense importance in the narratives of urban recall.'
City of God and Slumdog Millionaire'
are unique for the way they operate'
through these landscapes of memory.'
They also draw on a form of mediatized language,'
televisual liveness, music television, news photography,'
the use of digital effects.
These intermedial elements create their own sensorium,'
which some have described as hyper-realism.'
Both Slumdog and City of God adopt a multimedia'
expressivity.
And it is interesting how the media itself is so'
crucially placed in both films.
Jamal in Slumdog is speaking to us through television,'
while in City of God, Rocket's memory"
is channelized for the world through his photographs.'
In City of God, the events move at a pace'
that becomes difficult to retain for the filmmaker.'
There is a desire to recognize the media'
world and its circulation of popular culture,'
to stage this entry into slum life.'
Through these intersections, the films make it clear that they'
cannot transcend into a planetary perspective.'
Rather, life itself has come to resemble the movies.'
Igor Krstic, in fact, suggests a connection between the gunshots'
and the camera in City of God.
By drawing on a more general tendency of popular cinema,'
particularly in popular male action, horror, crime,'
or gangster film genres, the film'
probes the ethical limits of representing violence'
on screen.
Narrative itself frays at the edges'
as events bleed through with great force.'
I hope through the presentations today,'
I have managed to foreground the distinctly different logic'
at work in the capture of slum life on screen.'
Thank you.
[applause]
[inaudible]
Well, I guess that's a hard act to follow."
Thank you, Ranjani, for the disturbing images.'
The goal of our two and a half day venture'
here is not to disturb you entirely,'
although we don't mind disturbing you a little bit,"
but actually to provoke.
And so I'm just going to this as the first opportunity"
that I'll have to provoke you and say after watching this,"
do we think that slums are a problem?'
And the reason I ask that is because if you'
look at the way we have entitled this two and a half day'
adventure, it's nothing about the problem of slums."
But it's about an enduring phenomenon."
And so what if we imagine that slums are the answer, and then'
the answer to what?
Because maybe their endurance is the illustration of a fact'
that somebody benefits from their existence.'
And those who benefit from their existence'
have lots of reasons not to do things about slums.'
We come to this discussion after more than 100 years of attempts'
to deal with slums and after more than 200 years at least'
of their existence at scale in cities.'
We haven't been able to do very much over 100 years,"
although we've talked a lot about it."
And so I have an idea that maybe our account is wrong.'
And maybe our account wraps around it'
in narrative like the narrative that film then reinforces'
that then leaves us all feeling so numb and unable to act'
that we just assume that the problem is just either'
too big to deal with or maybe we forget'
that slums themselves actually represent'
the answer to something.
But what is it?
I don't know.
But maybe we'll find out in the next couple of days."
So I'm George McCarthy, otherwise known"
as Mac, the president at the Lincoln'
Institute of Land Policy.
Now I want to welcome up to the stage to respond,'
as we're now going to have to make some sense out"
of the horror that we just viewed-- and it was stunning,'
I have to say, but chilling--
Brody, Brodwyn Fischer, a professor'
of history from the University of Chicago and Janice'
Perlman-- oh, OK.
All right.
I guess I should have gone over there--'
and Janice Perlman, the president'
of the Mega-Cities Project and researcher'
at the Columbia University.
And so one of the things that Ranjani showed'
us is that how we view or where we view slums'
are clearly an important fact, a point of view.'
And part of the point of view of the way we look at them'
are in still photos or even in images that only depict'
kind of a moment in time.
And I think that maybe it would be'
useful to start with kind of a more historic perspective'
to actually put slums into a longer frame, a longer vision.'
And so Brody, maybe you can give us'
some reflections on what we just saw and provoke us further.'
Thanks.
Thank you.
It's an honor to be here and a pleasure especially"
to share the stage with this wonderful three colleagues.'
We have very little time.
So I'm going to get straight to the point."
As a historian of Latin America and Brazil,'
I would like to do three things in these quick comments--'
the first is to try to place the informal city that we've just"
seen in these filmic representations both'
in the context of time-- to take us back in time and think'
a little bit about cinema in the early stages,'
particularly in Brazil--
and also to take it to the realm of other kinds'
of cultural representation and talk a little bit'
about how film is very similar to other ways of representing'
the favela that we can see in other contexts'
and other spaces.
I'll then second go on to talk about"
what is the nature of the messages that'
are coming from cultural production about the favela,'
particularly in Brazil, but also in this larger context?'
And lastly, I'd like to talk a little bit about what"
that has meant in terms of the kinds of policies that'
tend to be created on the basis of the images and the visions'
that we see in film and that we see'
in other cultural representations.'
So it's actually really a privilege"
to be somebody who works in Brazil'
and to think about these issues, because Brazil has had places'
that have been identified as favelas,'
as shantytowns, as informal cities, for almost exactly 120'
years.
1898 was the date that the first favela was named in Brazil.'
It wasn't the first time that that kind of settlement"
existed.
But it was the first time that it was named.'
And importantly, that was when it began'
to be thought of as a problem.
And almost as soon as that kind of neighborhood'
began to be thought of by the elite,'
by architects, by planners, by governors, as a problem,'
then it started to be represented'
in different kinds of media.
The first filmic representations of favelas in Brazil'
are actually from the 1900s, from the very beginnings'
of the genre of film in Brazil itself.'
And they were not surprisingly representations of Carnival.'
Carnival came from the favelas.
And the music samba came from the favelas.'
And almost as soon as it began to make'
its way into the streets of Rio, you'
began to have photographers and filmmakers'
going and trying to catch snippets of that live action.'
You had the first actual lengthy film'
devoted to the favela in 1926.
It was a rant against favelas that'
was meant to justify a removal campaign'
by a member of the Rotary Club and a very'
important influential policy maker named Mattos Pimenta.'
And then in 1935, you had the first long action drama,'
not only that was the first one to be set in the favela,'
but a movie-- it was called Favela Dos Meus Amores-- that'
was considered the very first serious dramatic national film'
in Brazilian cinema.
So it wasn't only the first representation of a favela,"
but it was actually thought to be'
the beginning of the representation'
of some authentic vision of Brazil in the cinematic realm.'
And that juxtaposition is very important.'
It isn't just a kind of external representation of this place,"
but an external representation of this place as something'
that represents what Brazil is all about.'
And so that's a very interesting difference,"
I think, between the films that we've just seen"
and some of these early films.
It was followed in the 1950s with two very important films'
that are understood as the beginning'
of cinematic realism in Brazil by Nelson Pereira dos Santos.'
One of them in 1955 is called Rio 40 Graus--'
so Rio 40 Degrees or 110 degrees--'
and another one in 1957 called Rio Zona Norte.'
And then, of course, there's the very famous Orfeu Negro"
in 1959.
And this series of films is actually'
the beginnings of the representations'
of the favela in Brazil.
And it was coincident with the beginnings'
of these kinds of representations in other parts'
of Latin America as well, although I don't have time"
to talk about that.
One of the things that's really interesting about these films"
is that they mimic in many ways other forms'
of cultural production.
So we have, for example, in 1903, the very first example'
of a chronicler who goes up to the hills of Rio'
and wants to expose them to the rest of the world,'
wants to tell everybody what these places are like.'
That begins in 1903.
You also have samba, which is a kind of popular journalism.'
And its material, its prime material'
from the very beginning, is to tell'
outsiders what the world of the favela is like.'
And this becomes, by the 1930s, Brazil's national music, right?"
And so Brazil's national music is"
about these places, usually very positive representations,'
the favela as a site of authenticity,'
of love, of community in this sense'
of togetherness and unity.
It's also, of course, a space of blackness."
And it's the first cultural medium"
in which blackness is really portrayed in a positive light,'
is through samba.
You have photographers going up in the hills'
as early as the early 1900s.
And poets and novelists soon followed.'
There are, in 1935, two major novels'
that are set in favela communities and that project'
to the rest of the world what these places are all about.'
And then, of course, you have the modernist artists'
who very famously go up into the hills in the 1920s and '30s"
and produce not only paintings, but also other forms'
of more abstract visual art.
And poets follow them up into the hills--'
all of this to say that cinematic representations are'
very old.
And they're part of a whole kind of cultural construct"
that exists from very, very early on in the history'
of these kinds of settlements.
Now the second question-- what does this cultural production'
tell us?
Now there's a very simplistic way"
of thinking about this-- that it can tell us'
good things about the favelas and bad things'
about the favelas, right?
And if we were to think about the movies'
that we've just seen, there is, of course,"
a deeper level where what we're seeing"
is the nature of the protagonists in these films.'
And I very much agree that there is, in these latest'
representations, a lot more depth, a lot more'
understanding of the meaning of what these places are.'
But they are overwhelmingly negative representations--'
representations of suffering, of violence, of extremes.'
And one of the things that's interesting about Brazilian"
films is that from the beginning,'
they're not completely about that."
In fact, the early generation of films'
is much more about these experiences of human emotion,'
experiences of family, experiences of connection,'
experiences of all of the things that the sambas'
were telling the rest of the Brazilian public'
that favela life was all about.
So they'll say the asphalt, the city,"
those are the fake people.
Those are the liars.
Those are the policemen and the authorities'
that come in to beat us up.
But we here, we have invented this beautiful musical genre.'
We understand what human feeling is all about.'
We understand that greed is wrong in a way'
that people down there on the asphalt'
who are speculating on real estate don't understand."
And we want you to see our authentic Brazilian black life'
here in the favela.
And so there's this kind of positive representation"
that comes across in these early films that's very interesting."
Of course, there's also a lot of negative representation."
And films were used as propaganda pieces'
to try to build sentiment against what were understood'
to be all of the problems of the space of the favela as well.'
But I won't repeat that because that vision, I think,"
is projected far more than the positive vision'
that I've just told you about.
But there's also a deeper level that I just"
want to spend the very few minutes'
that I have left explaining.
And that is that whether these films'
and these other cultural expressions'
were positive or negative, whether they'
saw beautiful blackness or whether they'
saw degenerate, racialized ideas of misery and marginality,'
no matter which side of that they fell on,'
there are certain commonalities in all'
of these representations.
And to put this in very few words, what'
it is that they're seeing in the favela"
is a space that is separate, a space that is enclosed,'
and a space that is fundamentally'
understood as other when you compare it to the asphalt, when'
you compare it to the city.
You can even see that it Los Olvidados in that clip'
that we just saw this idea that you have these modern cities.'
And then you have these other spaces.'
And the other spaces are in some ways timeless.'
They don't belong to modernity.
They don't belong to what the rest of the city is about."
So there's this separation.
There's also this idea in all of these cultural mediums"
that you need a cultural guide, that you'
need some kind of intermediary that's going to take you--"
and this is from 1903 on.
They actually say it outright.
You can't go up to the favela by yourself."
You need someone to take you and explain to you what is what,'
because you're not going to be able to navigate these alleys."
You're not going to be able to understand."
So whether the guide is the chicken in City of God'
or whether the guide is the chronicler that'
was such a common persona in these early chronicles,'
you need somebody else to explain it to you.'
And that person generally in the early years'
is from the outside.
They're not from the inside, as we just saw in those films."
There's also an idea in all of these,"
as I said before, that this is a place apart.'
It is strange.
It's picturesque.
It's fantastical.
It's grotesque.
But it is another world.
It is not the same world that the presumed observers'
are observing from, right?
There is this kind of separation between these spaces.'
There is also a notion that the rest of the city might exist,'
but there's an invisible frontier between the spaces."
It's the aerial photographs that we just"
saw but written into these texts much'
earlier than aerial photography was actually existing.'
And one very important exception to this'
is the film Rio 40 Graus, Rio 110 Degrees, which actually'
has an aerial view at the beginning'
like you see in later films.
But the aerial view is actually meant'
to open our eyes to the fact that the favela is'
much bigger than the city, that in fact,'
if you go away from the central touristic points in Rio de'
Janeiro, most people are living in these alternate spaces.'
And it really makes that point very clearly.'
But that's rare.
In most of these films, what you're seeing"
are these very clear frontiers between these spaces.'
And finally, in all of these movies,'
everything is happening in the urgent present tense.'
And that's something that's very true, I think, in the films"
that we've just seen.
Even though they have these historical flashbacks,'
there's this sense of urgency.
There's a sense of now.
There's a sense that these are places where everything"
is always urgent, because life or death always'
depends on what is happening right now in these kinds'
of places, right?
And this is very early on in the history of these places'
as well.
All right.
So finally, just a couple of sentences on what'
are the seeds that these images place for policy?'
Now it would take a lot more time'
than I have to talk about the specific positive and negatives'
and the specific kinds of campaigns'
that these lead to, not only in Brazil, but in the rest'
of Latin America.
There's a lot to do with that that I don't have time"
to do it.
But one point that I would like to-- or two points that I would'
like to specifically emphasize--
one of them is that films and other cultural media'
have tended to reinforce the notion that you need'
an outsider to understand and mediate these problems,'
that the policymakers and the people who are going to decide'
what to do about this problem, and even the people that'
are going to decide what the problems are,'
they are not the people that are the object of the gaze.'
They're not the people that live inside of the slum communities."
You need a mediator.
You need somebody from the outside'
to come and tell you what the problem is'
and how it ought to be solved.
And the function of the people who'
appear in this cultural media tends'
to be to simply express the suffering, the problem,'
the experience of being a victim of whatever problem'
it is that has been identified by these mediators, right?'
And that, of course, is very important in policy terms'
because it indicates that the table, the people who'
should be at this conference, the people who should be'
at the places where decisions are made,'
are the ones who are observing, who are being explained'
to by these mediators.
They're not the people who are being observed."
And I think that that's a very important function"
that a lot of cultural media have.'
And I would even say that a film like City of God'
continues with that function, even though we're"
seeing it from the perspective of this person who grows up.'
The filmmaker really did a lot to change the book'
that it was based on in ways that'
really reflect an outsider's gaze in important ways."
And then finally, I'm just going to end with one last more"
provocative point, which is that in emphasizing the notion'
of these communities as being closed to the outside,'
as being self-contained, as being the expression'
in and of themselves of a problem--'
that is, they are problematic spaces.'
Maybe they're problematic spaces because they're victimized."
Maybe they're problematic spaces because they're oppressed."
Maybe they're problematic spaces because the people who"
live in them are somehow misformed, somehow'
full of anomie, or full of violence, or full of rage.'
Whatever the reason, these are portrayed'
as problematic spaces.
And they're also portrayed as spaces"
that are not defined by their connection'
to what is outside of them.
And I think that that fundamental insight,'
that notion that the problem that we need to solve'
is within the favelas borders, has consistently'
misshapen the sorts of policy remedies that'
are being proposed both by the left and by the right and even'
sometimes by the communities themselves,'
and that if we were to take an aerial view that's not"
like Mike Davis's notion of an aerial view,"
but take an aerial view that actually tends to emphasize'
what Rio 40 Graus, what Rio 110 Degrees could see,'
which is that these are spaces that in all kinds of ways'
are fundamentally connected, not only'
physically and economically and socially'
to the rest of the city,
but these are also spaces that serve'
a function within the systems of economic inequality'
and also the systems of power relationships'
that govern the city as a whole.
That is, these are not places that are there by accident.'
But they are places that actually'
have a place in larger structures of power,'
larger structures of inequality, that'
are the actual roots of the problem.'
It's not what happens within the favelas borders that"
causes whatever aspects of favela life result in suffering'
or are problematic.
The problem is actually in that relationship'
between those spaces and these larger structures of power.'
And cultural representations tend'
to downplay that by focusing on the favelas as spaces apart,'
as spaces that deserve to be focused on without reference'
to what's going on around them.
And I think that's something that we can really"
take forward, I hope, in the next couple of days'
of discussions at this conference.'
Thank you.
[applause]
Thank you [inaudible].
[applause]
Thanks, Brody.
And because I'm blunt, I will restate your point"
in a different way, which is to say,'
what if slums or favelas or these alien other places'
within our cities are not just integral to the life'
of the cities, but they're integral to the success"
of the cities?
The cities themselves would not thrive and flourish'
without the existence of those favelas.'
So that was our provocation.
We're going to try to reserve a little bit of time"
for questions.
We have a couple of people with microphones in the audience.'
But I want to turn to Janice now to get'
her provocations and her views on the amazing things we've"
just seen already today.
So is this live?
Yes.
Thank you.
Well, thank you so much, Brody, and thank you.'
That was just-- it's a very hard act to follow."
I'm very thrilled to be here.
And well, I'm still in the emotional throes"
of seeing those visuals.
I just wanted to start--
while I was listening to you, I thought of just starting'
by reading-- since this is in the Graduate School of Design,'
and it's architecture--
reading a quote that describes the new urbanism.'
This is from The Guardian of April 30th, 2014.'
"The new urbanism provides for communities'
which are robust, resilient, sustainable.'
They have high density and low cost,'
living in locations within reach of work by foot or bike.'
They are closely knit with self-reliant communities'
in which ties of families and neighborhoods are strong."'
Well, if I ever heard a description'
of a favela or any other squatter settlement, that's it."
So I mean, that's to answer your question of"
wouldn't it be wonderful if this is the way,"
this would be the model instead of getting'
into an elevator in a high rise building'
after you go through a gate and then'
looking at the ceiling or the floor'
to not make eye contact with the other people in your building?'
So this is why, in my book, Favela,'
I wrote a little poem called "Why I Love Favelas."'
So my point, I just wanted to say'
that number one, if you look at the way images of favelas'
in Rio have metamorphosized over these years,'
I would say it could be said to go from the slandered slum'
to the inclusivity to the fetishized favela'
and back again.
Squatter settlements are the fastest growing percentage'
of the world's population right now."
And they have constantly been, as you'
described, seen as other.
So I was going to pick up on this concept'
of how powerful the ideology is and the image we have'
of favelas and how easy it is to blame the victim'
once you see these.
And I was just going to give a little whirlwind tour very'
quickly through how the circular relationship played out'
in Brazil from the beginning of my research in 1968'
during the military dictatorship to my current research, which'
was from 2015 to this last month.'
So it shows exactly what Brody was saying,'
this powerful relationship and interrelationship'
between the images we have and the visions'
we have in our heads and public policy.'
What makes public policy possible and acceptable'
is the images that are sold to us as what the policy is acting'
upon, the people and the spaces the policy is acting upon.'
So during the dictatorship in Brazil, which started in 1964,'
favelas were seen in the usual way'
you've seen portrayed-- dangerous, dirty, violent,"
family breakdown, prostitution, crime, every possible thing,'
unhygienic.
And if you read any of the original discussions of any'
of squatter settlements anywhere in the world,'
you'll see the same unhygienic metaphors."
Even Gordon Parks, who did the wonderful photography in Rio'
in 1961 of Catacumba, one of the favelas I lived in,'
he talked about the pathetic story of Flavio.'
There are pictures in his book of a little kid'
with cockroaches crawling over him and little'
Flavio with his shirt torn.
And it was all about the pathos and how pathetic'
and how we have to come in and help them and raise money'
from Life Magazine readers.
I mean, I lived in that community a few years later.'
There was nothing pathetic about it.'
People were working, organizing, fighting the government'
to get urban services, withholding their votes'
from the one place they could vote for,'
which is city councilman, to bargain with among candidates'
for better improvements.
I mean, they're really savvy and really well-organized."
And yet these images of favela as the so-called cancerous sore'
on the beautiful body of Rio de Janeiro'
made it very easy to justify removal, the bulldozing down,'
the massive destruction of people's lives,"
this community where Flavio lived,'
Catacumba in the south zone, the wealthiest zone of Rio.'
People were removed.
They were threatened by police violence'
and removed in garbage trucks to public housing projects'
outside in greater distance from their work and school'
and health access than they could navigate.'
And they were put in public housing projects,'
including the City of God.
That was one of them and other names'
that came from the Alliance for Progress.'
One of the places was called Villa Alianza, Alianza para el'
Progreso.
And one was called Villa Kennedy.'
So the United States was complicitous in this idea'
that this was cleaning up and improving'
the lives of these people with, again,'
no reference to what the people would like or choose'
your their own trade-offs.
And the other thing is that once they'
were located in these public housing projects,'
they were made to pay 25% of their previous family income'
every month towards a rent.
And since their family income decreased by 75%'
because they no longer could work two or three jobs'
and the kids couldn't work after school"
and the wives couldn't get in-- it"
was too expensive for the transportation-- many of them'
defaulted.
And in their defaulting on these payments,'
they were sent to what very well could'
be described as debtors prison.
They were called Casa de [? triaging-- ?] triage houses.'
Triage in war are the patients who'
were too sick to be worthy of the scarce medical supplies'
and left to die on the battlefield.'
So they were left to die on the battlefield.'
And the pictures I was going to show before we decided'
not to show any PowerPoints in this section,'
would show these triage houses, which'
were way out in the boonies, you'll see on the map."
They're not connected to anything, all lined up,"
little boxes in the baking sun, and then'
show more and more and more being built.'
And then I zoom from 1973 to 2011.'
And I show the same houses, rows and rows of them, with row.'
And that's the new Brazilian housing project"
called Minha Casa, Minha Vida--
my house, my life.
They couldn't come up with one new design"
with all those brilliant architects and planners'
from 1973 to 2010--
I mean, really?
OK.
So my research-- in 1968 and '69, I lived in three favelas"
in Rio.
And what I found out exactly was that the reason'
I called my book The Myth of Marginality'
was that these people who live in these communities'
were not marginal at all.
In fact, they were totally tightly integrated'
into the rest of society, just in a very asymmetrical manner.'
So they gave their labor, their political support,'
their social and cultural life, to the city'
but got almost nothing back in return.'
And my mantra was, they're not socially disorganized, which is"
what they were supposed to be.
But they're excluded.
They're not culturally backwards."
But they're stigmatized.
They're not economically parasitic."
But they're exploited.
They do the jobs that no one else'
would do in conditions no one else would'
accept for salaries that no one else would work for.'
And yet they're taken for granted and treated terribly."
And they're not politically radical."
No one had to be scared of them making any revolution.'
They were so happy to be in the city.'
And they weren't comparing themselves"
to the rich people who lived next to them.'
They were comparing themselves to the people back on the farm.'
And in comparison, they were doing great.'
And they knew they were investing'
for the future generations.
So the policy implication of the fact'
that they were seen as marginal was to get rid of them.'
And so it was very easy to justify the massive removal'
of 100,000 people.
They were burned out.
They were shot at.
They were totally traumatized.
Fast forward, the end of the dictatorship'
comes the democracy, 1985, the new democratization.'
And we all think that, of course,'
we're never, ever going to see removal again."
Because now favelas, who were either 20% or 25%'
of the population of the city, now they're going to vote."
No one is ever going to remove them again.'
And so the new idea is incorporate'
them and the inclusive city.
And then there's upgrading.
And so the policies, the visuals about favelas starting'
to be better, films come out like Favela Rising,'
which shows these beautiful nonprofit organizations'
like AfroReggae that organize kids.'
As an alternative to going into the drug gangs,'
they can go into an equally bonding social group that's"
based around music and rhythm and song'
and expressing the words of living in a favela.'
So all of this gets translated into massive programs'
of onsite upgrading, where infrastructure is brought'
to the favela that's supposed to equalize"
the infrastructure that's happening on the asphalt."
And at this moment, there's a very nice political alliance"
between the city government, the state government,'
and the federal government.
And there's a big program called Favela-Bairro, which is jointly"
funded by Inter-American Development'
Bank and the national Brazilian government and the city.'
Unfortunately, just at the time that democracy returned'
and everyone got out of jail, all of the war on poverty'
that the US was running and closing'
the Columbia borders redirected the narcotraffic'
through Brazil.
So now all of these drugs were flowing into Brazil, especially'
cocaine.
And it was taken into the favelas,'
where it could be divided into smaller parcels'
and where the police had usually not penetrated,'
especially after democracy because police'
had been very abusive.
And so the idea of Brizola was, let's just police the asphalt."
So aside from those winding streets'
where you see the chase scenes, there was a very convenient way'
to hide this drug traffic.
And even though less than 1%, less than 0.01%'
of the people in the favelas were doing any drug trafficking'
or drug use, they returned to the idea of favelas'
as a place of criminality, violence, and danger swept'
back.
And all the images swept back.
And there are many, many films came out'
about the violence and Escuadron De La Muerte and Tropa de Elite'
and terrible, terrible things about the violence, the drug'
wars.
OK.
So the media, of course, is promoting this,'
the global one, television.
And you see this always, photographs of violence'
and death in the papers.
OK.
Fast forward-- then I get to come to my second study.'
So my second study was 30 years later'
after I lived in these favelas.
I interviewed 750 people, 250 in each of three favelas.'
So I tried to find them again, 30 years later.'
I found several hundred-- more than 41%.'
And I interviewed them.
And I interviewed their children and their grandchildren.'
And I already had interviewed their parents'
or asked about them.
And then we found that a whole--
I started documenting this metamorphosis of marginality'
and the actual social mobility that many of the kids-- not'
the original people in their own lives,'
not so much their children.
But in the grandchildren's generation,"
they really started to have some integration'
into both the economy, the social fabric of the city,'
and polity.
And really, about half of them were no longer'
living in a so-called marginalized area.'
However, the prejudice and stereotype'
against living in a favela, where 50% of them still lived,'
was so powerful that despite the fact that they'
were in universities, that they had'
the same level of household domestic appliances'
as the average of the entire municipality of Rio de Janeiro,'
they never got to be treated with respect.'
They were never treated with equal standing under the law.'
Killing them was never prosecuted.'
There was enormous disregard for the humanness and dignity'
of these human beings just because they'
lived in a favela at the time when'
over these generations, prejudice,'
their experience of being discriminated on for dark skin'
just started going away and lightening up.'
At the end, the kids didn't find it a huge discrimination,"
or being women, or being anything--'
but living in a favela, yes.
It was the biggest source of their'
being discriminated for jobs or anything else.'
So then I wrote my second book, Favela,'
which talks about these many longitudinal study,'
many generations.
And the recent thing I wanted to report on'
was that I've been studying the effects of the Olympics,"
the World Cup and the Olympics, on the favela communities'
and what has happened in these last three years.'
So now there was a new excuse.
Getting ready, cleaning up the city'
for these mega events opened the doors to the unthinkable'
return of favela removal and unthinkable occupation 24/7'
of military police living inside the favelas,'
carrying guns and using them and using their bullying power'
at will, which ended up increasing violence in the city'
and ended up removing another 177,000'
people under the excuse of getting ready for the Olympics.'
So it was kind of back to the future.'
I don't have time to tell you about the interplay"
between research and practice and public policy.'
So I'll skip that and go right to my lessons learned."
OK.
So I'll talk later about the 25-year lag"
time between knowledge creation and research and public policy.'
But I'll go right to what I learned"
in these 50 years of work.
One-- it's extremely difficult to change people's"
attitudes, perceptions, and belief systems.'
They are very, very deeply entrenched.'
And media can fan these fears and these images'
very easily, as we just saw.
Two-- it's even more difficult to change people's behavior."
You might even open their minds a little,'
but changing their behavior is very, very much more difficult.'
Three-- it's even more difficult to change public policy."
And four-- it is more and more and more'
difficult to change the way public policy is implemented.'
So I've seen the words and public"
policy get to be perfect--
citizen participation, monitoring and evaluation,'
community control, community decision making, arrangements'
with the government to hold accountable, blah, blah--'
nothing.
When it gets down to the implementation on the ground,'
the projects are delayed.
It's easier to remove them, put a public housing project there."
We started too late, no time for baseline evaluation.'
Forget the citizen participation, too.'
So I put to us the challenge of this sentence that I also'
have in a cartoon in my PowerPoint'
that someone drew for me, a Brazilian.'
And it shows a guy drawing a little plant.'
And then it says, to plan is human, to implement divine.'
And then it shows him watering the plant and [inaudible] it.'
And so to end up, the new book that I'm working on now"
is called the [speaking portuguese],,'
The Importance of Personhood.
And it's all about the bottom line,"
is whether we can treat the other'
as a human being with dignity who is not invisible,'
who is a creator and producer of culture'
and intellectual capital, not a consumer'
of the intellectual capital and culture'
that the elite is producing.
Thank you very much.
[applause]
Well, thanks, Janice, and to just put another blunt point'
to it, what if the pathology is not intrinsic to the slums'
but it's actually part and parcel of our reaction to them"
and part and parcel of the way we'
refuse to bridge the kind of gulf of otherness, which'
is very often reinforced by the images we produce in our films,'
in our media, in our news, that tell us'
that we do not want to cross a bridge?'
Because we can only do it with a guide, right?'
So we have a couple of minutes for questions'
if there's anybody with burning questions."
And we have a couple of microphones out there.'
Let's try to keep them quick.
This is probably a response to Mac's bluntness, provocation."
Do you think it's fair--
I'm interested in all of your reactions"
to this-- do you think it's fair to think"
of slums as actually a vehicle for socioeconomic mobility?'
In my experience, slums are often'
places where there's incredible entrepreneurship, innovation."
It provides investment opportunities'
for families, low income families,'
to invest outside of the formal economy in their homes.'
Granted, there's a lack of basic services."
Do you think that's a fair way to view slums?"
Or is somehow that neglecting some intrinsic problems'
that we should be addressing?
Well, my answer is I think it is a fair depiction.'
And I think Sheila and others that are part of this'
will say yes.
In fact, these are thriving areas of both'
of shelter and commerce.
And in Dharavi, what do they produce--'
20-something percent of the GDP of Mumbai, right?'
I think we take a few questions.
[inaudible]
Just to say quickly that I think the answer,'
like in so many of these things, is yes and no.'
That is, that it's absolutely clear every place I've ever"
been that these are oftentimes the only way that people who'
come from regions where they don't have an economic future"
can find social mobility, can get their kids in school.'
And you see, really over the 120 years,'
you see remarkable social mobility.'
And people struggle for it.
And they fight for it.
And it's the battle of their lives."
But this is where the point gets to take our focus away'
from these as separate spaces and think of them as connected'
to larger structures.
Because how much would that energy'
be rewarded more if these were not'
places that were stigmatized by the vulnerabilities that'
come along with not being legally sanctioned?'
People pay costs for informality,'
even as informality gives them opportunity.'
And so the problem is not the slum itself.'
The problem is the burden of vulnerability'
that is placed on that neighborhood'
by being called informal, by being called illegal,'
by being called a slum.
So that's what I would leave with."
Right, and the people say, look how much they can do with $50.'
Look how much they made happen with $150.'
They don't say, imagine what they could"
do if you gave them real money.
It's just like, well, they can get along on so little."
And they make so much of it.
So that's sort of to follow up what you said."
Do we have any other burning questions?'
I think you're all as stunned as--"
There's a question.
Alex has a question.
First of all, a wonderful evening you're providing us--"
I go back to cinema because I think what I'm hearing"
and also what I'm seeing and when I look at this problem"
historically, especially in the United States,'
is that conception creates all sorts of obstacles'
to improvement.
And so I'd like to go back to the idea of the complexity,"
the community, all those kinds of things that might'
have been in the early cinema.
And of course, that's a kind of trope"
also, to find the authentic [inaudible]'
what you see in early American cinema as well.'
But anyway, the question would be, is there a way'
or are there filmmakers who would take a different angle'
and not take this dichotomy that was'
so obvious in your original aerials,'
where it's always this versus that,"
and get at the complexity and the interconnection'
of urban life?
Because we just said, these are cities.'
And some of the parts of the city look like this.'
Some parts look like that.
We'd have a whole different story to tell."
So that would be my question.
It's on.
Just--
OK.
So the thing about cinema is that--'
and this is a question that's posed all the time"
to filmmakers-- because cinema approximates'
the illusion of reality.
So it's seen as a vehicle of representation."
It's not representing.
None of these films are representing'
any authentic reality.
They are entering this universe of what'
they imagine urban life is to produce'
a different kind of expression.
So I would like us to think about cinema, these expressions'
of an experience.
It's not about capturing authentic reality,"
which is why I started off by saying that this'
is a different form of knowledge that'
has no relationship directly with sociology, economics.'
It's about affect.
It's about bodily sensation and that sensorium."
And I think the way in which these last two films, City'
of God, and the fact that it disturbs,'
for me is the great success of these two films,'
that it tends to disturb.
And if you see Bunuel's film, 1959,"
that is also really disturbing because there's"
no place for us to escape into feeling a sense of pathos.'
And for me, that's the key question here."
What these agency?
These are all people who are agents of what'
they are doing in these films.
So in that sense, the depiction of the world'
of the slum in which we feel we can'
capture the complexity, to me seems like a bit of a myth.'
It's not really possible.
That's the whole point of these films,"
is that even when they're at ground level,"
you can't see everything.
And from an aerial perspective, you'
see even less of what that experience is.'
So it's the density of this ecology."
It's not about capturing a vision."
But it's about understanding this what is this ecology?"
It is dense.
It is difficult. And it is complex.'
So as a practitioner and in seeing world cinema and the way'
that world cinema has interacted with all'
these different geographical territories'
and tried to deal with these questions,'
it's always this difficulty, the problems of vision."
No, it's about the limits of vision and what you can"
and cannot capture.
And that arrogance-- films, cinema'
will have even less than academics.'
Filmmakers cannot work that arrogance,'
that I will show it all to you.
That's the whole myth of the concept city"
versus the labyrinth in city, that you'
feel that you can transcend to a point'
from where you can actually illuminate.'
But there is that tension that runs throughout.'
And that is the tension that these films capture.'
So it's that tension that I think"
is very interesting for us to think about these questions.'
And though I feel that some people saw City of God'
as disturbing, and Slumdog Millionaire'
was really trashed in India, all for the wrong reasons.'
There was some vague nationalism that came to the fore.'
And suddenly, there was total denial.'
India doesn't have slums.
This is what we saw in all the newspapers--'
total denial.
So for me, it was an event.
These are events.
Film should be seen-- these kinds of film'
should be seen as political, social events that'
open a world of debate and discussion.'
And it also makes us confront some things about ourselves'
also as spectators.
We are comfortable about seeing it in a certain way.'
And when doesn't go in that direction,"
then we are disturbed.
And so that judgment comes very easily.'
And that's why-- and I've got into trouble about this many"
times--
I do believe that the aesthetics of violence'
is a very powerful mode today.
And unless we recognize what it's"
doing, how violence is actually communicating something,'
it will be difficult for us to understand'
what is actually shifted in cinema in the recent past.'
So I think that's, for me, it's important to really think"
about the tension and not feel that this is'
a problematic representation.
Because it's not trying to represent."
It's trying to introduce us to a tension that exists over here."
And then think about, what is this space?'
Because I cannot really, as a film studies scholar,'
I cannot immediately have a relationship to policy.'
Neither can I have a relationship'
to total knowledge.
Because I know the kind of myth-making'
that goes on in the world of cinema'
and in the world of the academy.
So the fact that there is that total knowledge possible,'
that desire--
that desire needs to be also questioned a little.'
That total illumination is something that we can achieve.'
I would like to leave it as incomplete and [inaudible]..'
Which is our goal all along, to create tension and dissonance'
and to provoke.
And I think this conference is off to an auspicious start.'
So we'll have to end there.
We're definitely out of time.
I really, really thank you for coming.'
I hope you help me thank our panelists'
for a stimulating discussion.
[applause]
