Thanks for coming out tonight to the Aga Khan Program Lecture.'
The Aga Khan Program is dedicated'
to the study of Islamic art, architecture, urbanism,'
landscape and conservation.
And also to the application of knowledge'
from that study and research to contemporary design projects.'
So, you will soon see that having Marina Tabassum here,'
is kind of perfect for that description.'
Last autumn, Marina Tabassum won the Aga Khan Award'
for architecture for the Bait-Ur-Rouf Mosque'
and Community Center in Dhaka, Bangladesh.'
The Mosque was completed in 2012 and designed at the behest'
of her grandmother.
It's been noted for its, quoting,"
"Quietly spectacular manipulation of brick, light'
and air".
But it's also been spoken about for certain features that"
have become part of the conventional architectural'
vocabulary for Mosque, mainly domes and minarets.'
And it's been noted for its conspicuous absence"
of those conventions.
Tabassum's design seems to derive from two"
intertwined investigations.
One, into the historical uses, developments'
of Mosque in the Islamic world, at large, and maybe'
in the Bengali context in particular.'
And I think of things like program,'
materials, but also program and materials'
framed by historical concerns.
And the second, it seems, is a much more personal'
understanding of the nature of the sacred'
or the spiritual communal spaces,'
needs of users and worshippers, and community members.'
Ms. Tabassum graduated from Bangladesh University'
of Engineering and Technology.
And then, shortly afterwards, founded the architecture firm'
Urbana with Kashef Chowdhury in Dhaka.'
In 1997, that firm won the commission'
for the Museum of Independence, and the Independence Monument'
in Bangladesh.
With a master plan that included a 50 meter tower monument.'
I think we will see that, as well as an underground museum'
and urban plaza, and other components.'
In 2005, after having worked as a partner and a founder'
of Urbana for 10 years, Ms. Tabassum'
established her own practice, Marina Tabassum Architects,'
also in Dhaka.
She's currently the Academic Director"
of the Bengali Institute of Architecture, Landscape'
and Settlements.
She served as a studio professor at Brock University,'
at University of Asia Pacific, as well as'
a visiting professor of the University'
of Texas in Arlington.
Please welcome Marina Tabassum.
[AUDIENCE CLAPS]
Thank you, Michael.
Thank you all for being here, and thank you, Mossan,'
for inviting me to share my work and my pursuit in architecture.'
Quite often, when I do a talk, I'm asked where was I educated,"
and I quite proudly say that I am entirely organic and made'
in Bangladesh.
But there is, I mean, I don't know how true that would"
be because, though I have never moved from my location'
to be educated elsewhere.
But the school where I went my formative years,'
were in an American missionary school, the Holy Cross.'
So, I was exposed to a multicultural, multi-religious'
atmosphere from a very early age.'
And then, again, the school where'
I went for my architecture, the Bangladesh University'
of Engineering and Technology, that was also set up'
by Texas A&M. So, the curriculum, which was followed,'
was entirely an American curriculum.'
So, never been to America, but in many ways, there'
is a certain kind of an interesting impression on me'
of that.
So, I graduated in the mid 90s with this entire scenario.'
When I went into practice, and was'
looking for a language of architecture,'
what should it be that would be my language?'
That's when I think a sort of a crisis hit me."
What would be my language?
What would be the language that I would like to pursue?'
And that's when actually I started"
looking into the land and the landscape, the history.'
And, in many ways, I think that shaped the way'
I think and I try to pursue my architecture.'
That's why I always like to start"
my presentation by giving a small introduction to where'
I come from.
So, that's Bangladesh.
If you see here, that's the Himalayan Range,"
and from Himalayan Range, are these two major rivers,'
the Brahmaputra and the Ganges.
And these two rivers are coming down to the Bay of Bengal,'
that eventually goes into the Indian Ocean.'
And as these two rivers have been flowing over centuries,'
they've accumulated silt, and that silt basically"
created the land, which is Bangladesh.'
2/3 of Bangladesh is delta, the Ganges Delta,'
and it is the largest delta in the world.'
So, you see it has more than 700 rivers crisscrossing all'
around the entire landscape.
And what you see here, you see water and land is just'
an entirety.
You cannot distinguish between water and land.'
What is land is water and what is water is land.'
It's so soft and fragile.
And, as these mighty rivers change their courses,'
quite often they erode the banks.'
And, again, in some places it emerges as land.'
So, there is a constant play of emergence and erosion'
that takes place.
And it's a very alluvial soil, so very fertile."
It's green, as you can see.
The Earth is almost like magic, you pop some seeds'
and it comes out as the plants.
And, since the rivers are the major feature,'
you can see that life has a certain kind of living entirely'
on water.
So, what is water can become land during the dry season.'
And, again, during the monsoon, that becomes water.'
So, there is no distinct line between water and land.'
And in many ways, this is the reason'
why you see a lot of informality and impermanence.'
People have a certain kind of a psyche that, over a year,'
as the land changes, when water becomes the landscape,'
people tend to move to the city to look for a living.'
And then, again, when it becomes dry again,'
and there is a possibility of growing crops,'
they go back to the landscape.
This, I find quite interesting.
You see that there is a lot of negotiation and appropriation,'
optimization that goes on.
What you see here as green, is actually water.'
It's the water hyacinth.
And, quite often, when there is lack of flow in the water,'
it becomes entirely filled with water hyacinth.'
And it's impossible to dig the boats crossing from one side"
to the other.
And what the boatmen do is, they basically'
bring all their boats together and create a boat bridge.'
So, that's how you negotiate with land and water."
And I find that that's a very interesting example."
Optimization.
How much do you really need to make a salon?'
A wall and a footpath, and that's just about it."
So, Tropic of Cancer basically crosses through Bangladesh.'
That's where it is.
You see the line?
And that's the reason why we have a subtropical climate."
A high hot and high humidity during the summer months.'
That's why rain is something we celebrate during the monsoon"
season.
And the dry season, which is at a time when'
we don't have any rain at all for a few months, no rain"
and an absolutely dry, because the wind comes from the north,'
from the Himalayas, and so it has no moisture in it.'
So, this becomes a very dry landscape.'
So, this is, actually in many ways,'
this was something I learned from Gazi, in a way.'
About this image, here.
The Banglar Agony.
And it actually shows what you really need,'
or how much you actually need to live in this land.'
With a moderate temperature and rain, all you need is a roof,'
all you really need is a roof to cover yourself'
from the elements, and the high plains'
to keep you away from the water.
And that's basically it, that's all architecture"
needs to be in the land where I come from.'
And then, again, of course, this blurring of the edges,'
which you find quite often, long verandas.'
Where the rooms are basically for sleeping and keeping'
your belongings, there is one space,'
which actually acts as the main living'
space for the entire year.
And this is an element which I find quite unique.'
Even when we grew up, we were living in houses like that,'
but you don't see that anymore in the landscape."
So, one of my first projects, when I was in Arbana,'
was a pavilion apartment.
And there, we tried to work on this idea of opening up'
the walls.
And you see here that the walls are entirely'
opened up to create this semi-open, semi-covered space.'
It was designed or conceived as a pavilion.'
And, as you open the doors here, it opens to the outside,'
so the room becomes a veranda.
This is the courtyard where I grew up.'
And courtyards in our kind of climate and space,'
is a very important and vital element,'
which is almost like the lung of the building, that actually'
lets it ventilate.
And, in a way, that courtyard, to some extent,'
came back in this project here.
You see this high volume, two story volume.'
What it does is basically it creates a stack effect.'
So, the hot air goes up and it creates low pressure.'
And what you'll see is the draft of air"
is being created from all sides.
So then, the building is constantly ventilated.'
And ventilation, a draft, is absolutely'
necessary for the hot, humid climate where we come from.'
So, that's the basic section of the building."
You see stacks of floors, quite a very common section in Dhaka,'
and that's where the apartment was located."
That's the high volume.
And we tried to open up all the edges here,'
so the air could make a move.
The quote from above.
And this, again, another small project'
to the outskirts of Dhaka, where we've used this nine"
square grid plan.
And you see there's a courtyard in the middle"
and there are courts on the sides.'
And these are the basic living areas.'
There was a pond and a small cut that goes to the water.'
The building, done in brick.
A very small, low-budget project, as a weekend house.'
And what you see here is those courtyards, the corner courts'
of the nine square plan.
And that's the court that basically ventilates the spaces"
and creates the draft of air.
And that's actually the main shaft in the middle."
And on top, we have these open pavilion-like spaces'
where you can sit in the afternoon'
and enjoy the surroundings.
So, as you just saw, brick is actually one of our materials.'
Because, being a delta, we don't have any other stone but brick."
So we have either to build with mud, mud'
as you can see in the vernacular architecture,'
or you can bake the mud and make it brick and use it.'
So, this is one of our 16th century old monastery,'
Buddhist monastery.
And in that time, brick was the relevant material'
for any kind of permanent construction.'
These are temples, Hindu temples, here.'
And the terracotta also done exquisitely detailed in brick,'
and then baked, created into terracottas.'
So, Brick construction is a tradition that we have.'
And you see here.
This is one of my projects, also.'
And these are the brick masons or master'
craftsman from the northern part of Bangladesh.'
They are the best brick masons that you can find.'
And this guy is one of the Aga Khan Award winners.'
So, you'll see a lot of brick kilns in our entire landscape,"
dotted with it.
And because they have a high carbon emission,'
one of the projects from UNDP was'
to reduce this carbon emission, and to create'
a new kind of hybrid Hoffman brick'
kiln, which would reduce the carbon'
emission into the atmosphere.
So, this is one of such kiln.
And one of my project was to design'
a small residential facility right next to the brick kiln,'
to show that it does not really emit as much.'
And it really doesn't.
You don't see any smoke coming out."
They have reduced the smoke by adding coal into the brick.'
So, that really works quite well.'
So, I designed a small pavilion, which'
was designed with the same idea of a brick kiln construction.'
So, what you see here is that capsule-like thing,'
which is entirely made from that construction technique.'
And a residential, some sitting area courtyard in the middle.'
This was what we had in mind.
And this went into construction halfway through,'
it's still not complete yet, but hopefully we'll"
be able to finish it soon.
So, handcrafting is an important phenomena which you see.'
Because every building that you see in'
Bangladesh are all handcrafted.
There's rarely any machine being used."
So, as such, handcrafting and the imperfection that'
comes with it, is a quality.
It's something that needs to be celebrated."
And, well, that's what you just saw."
Basically, this is what it turned into.'
And these are one of such craftsmen'
who work with their hands.
And our connection, specially we architects,'
when we work, you just don't give a drawing"
and ask them to build it, it has to be a connection with them,'
almost like a family.
Because you have to explain, you have to directly talk to them,'
and then create something out of it.'
There he is on the site.
And with his handcrafting, you see'
this is what he has created.
No machines, nothing.
Just pure, basic handcrafting.
And these are the kind of drawings we generally give,'
so you really see that there are proper AutoCAD'
drawings with dimensions.
But at times, you just have to go to the site,'
draw something, explain it to them,'
and that's how it gets built.
So, this is Dhaka.
The land here, you see, that's Dhaka."
On two sides, there is low-lying water.'
And in the south, we have a river, Buriganga.'
And on the north, there is Turag.'
You see, the Parliament Complex of Louis Khan is right there.'
That's our airport.
And basically, all the pink areas that you see'
are absolutely dotted with buildings.'
So it's a densely-built city, a mega-city"
that's growing constantly.
A city of 16 million, and in 300 square meter of area.'
So you see that the landscape of Dhaka, the cityscape.'
So, it's about 45,000 people per square kilometer."
So, that's the density of Dhaka city."
And that's where I actually practice"
and do my projects quite often.
Many of my projects are there.
So, that's quite a challenge, actually,"
when you work in a landscape like that.'
We don't have the luxury of building houses,"
we only build apartments.
So that there is enough people to abilitate.'
So, what you see here, is a basic section'
that you'll find anywhere.
When you get a project anywhere in the Dhaka cityscape,'
these are the kind of sections.
You'll have a basement, to place your car,"
and then there will be a ground floor,'
and then all the floors are either'
apartments, commercial blocks, or anything that comes with it.'
One such project that I did, was actually located'
right at this point here, which is'
right next to the major spine, which goes north'
and south of the Dhaka city.
This is one of the major spines.
That's the major spine of Dhaka city, right here."
And you already see in the Google Image'
that it's dotted with cars.
And it quite often remains absolutely, completely'
blocked with cars and traffic.
So, that was the site, right here,'
and it's an apartment building, which"
I knew that would never be used as an apartment building'
because, though the land use plan tells us it has to be one,'
and that's how we designed it also."
What we did was, basically, that's the plan you see here."
The court in the middle, you have the elevators and stairs,'
and these are the two apartments on two sides.'
What we did was, we opened up the edges,'
as I mentioned about the pavilion apartment and the idea'
of breathability, and how you need to breathe,'
make your space breathe.
We tried to open the edges on the sides'
to let it have that airflow and the draft of air.'
And that's the building, you see the traffic jam is already"
there.
And what we did is we created a facade, which'
is more for the public.
So it's a public facade.
Which actually gives something back to the city,'
and not entirely for the apartment.'
That's a developer-built project, a real estate"
development.
So that's the kind of image we created,"
and that's the building.
This is a competition which was for the Building Development'
Authority.
Which we designed.
It is again, in the city.
You see the city on here, that was the site.'
And what was required, it's again, another urban plot."
That's the plot we had.
And we were asked to design their office.'
As the city is moving towards north, it's growing."
So, they had their headquarters in the southern part,'
and wanted to move to the north.
So what we did--
it was a competition where they wanted their offices,'
and also to take up as much built-up area'
as are there, to give them certain other different kinds'
of use.
So we suggested a business hotel because in that location,'
they really needed something of that sort.'
So, this, what you see here, is the plan.'
So, we basically made four built forms.'
If I go to the next slide, you'll probably see better."
So, this is where you enter.
And, first, we created a podium.
This is the parking in the underground.'
Three basements.
And the way we did the design was,'
there were four blocks and a podium in the ground level.'
And then, we cut the building in a way'
that allows the air to flow in.
And the depth of the building was such'
that you could have natural air and natural ventilation,'
and light.
Into that space.
So, there was this shaft that we had created.'
These are the shafts that take up the air.'
And at the same time allows light, natural light.'
And you can see the cores.
And these are the offices.
This would be the business hotel.'
That's the basic section.
And that was the design we created.'
That the building was actually shaping, in a certain way,'
that it allows air to flow into that space.'
Well, we did not win, but I thought'
of sharing because it was one of the large projects where'
we have tried out this ventilation shaft.'
This project, which is absolutely'
to the south of Dhaka.
You see this part?
This is the densest area in the whole city.'
This is the river.
And around here, the member of the Parliament'
of this area, which is a client of mine, he's now the minister,"
once gave me a phone call asking me'
that he had this election pledge of making a few community'
centers and schools in this area.'
And just gave me a call and said, "Can you'
give me a design very quickly?
I'll give you two weeks.
Come up with the design of a community center".'
And, at times you have to do some things'
to satisfy your client.
So I said, "All right, I\'ll give you a design.'
Send me the site".
So he sent me the site location and everything.'
This was the site.
And it's entirely built on the edges."
And it was a very basic program.
Just as some large, open spaces for different kind'
of activities to take place.
So, we basically placed all the services at the back,'
and we left the main spaces open.'
So, these are the spaces that we had,'
and the service at the back, and the stair that takes people up.'
The basic section.
An atrium.
And you have the floors.
And from the top.
This is the 3-D image that I gave him for his election.'
And then, he won.
Not because of this image, because he already'
was quite popular in that area.
And after three years, we get a phone'
call that we need some details.
And then, I said, "What details?",'
and then, "What details?
Well, we are building this project, we need some details.'
There\'s some missing".
And then, for the first time, we heard that they've already"
laid the foundation.
It was already on site.
The foundation was done.
And that was the first time I said,'
"It was like a real disaster".
So we went, for the first time, to see this site.'
And there was this image in a large billboard'
with my name on it.
[AUDIENCE LAUGHS]
So you can imagine, I was already famous in that area'
because I was building their community center.'
But I have never visited the site.'
So this is the first project ever'
I've done where I haven't been to the site."
But it's finally getting built. So, that's where you see it."
That's the-- you see how densely built the surrounding is."
And it's coming towards completion now."
As it is still under construction,'
so the site is pretty much there.'
Another project, which I like to show'
because it's one of my very favorite ones"
that I've ever designed.
Which is the French German Embassy.'
So, in Dhaka, we have this area which is'
dedicated to all the embassies.
This one here is the American Embassy, the Canadian Embassy'
right next to it, that's the British Embassy,"
Chinese Embassy.
So, in between Chinese and Thai Embassy, this is the area.'
That land actually belongs to the French Embassy.'
Germans do not have a land, so they came to a deal'
that the Germans will pay for the building,'
and the French will give the land.'
So now, it's a French-German Embassy."
Which then went into a competition.'
And we were pre-selected of five different offices.'
And the interesting thing is, since it's an urban site"
and there is a small school behind,'
then, as it's a very high-security area,"
they needed 25 meter setbacks from all sides.'
So, what happened is, basically, we're"
left with a very small footprint.'
So, there is no way of making distinctly different embassies'
for the French and the Germans.
They have to be in one single building in a small footprint.'
So, that's what we worked on.
Basically, that's the school back there."
And this is the 25 meter setback from all sides.'
This is the footprint that you get.'
And what we did was, we created an atrium in the middle.'
Again, a small atrium.
And that's the square plan.
All the Passport section, the cafeteria services,'
are all on the sides.
But the main high-security zone was in the middle.'
And what we did was created a central atrium,'
and we cut the corners to allow the light and the ventilation'
to come through.
As this section.
And we won first prize for this project, but later on this'
was given to a French architect to build.'
So, that's a sad story.
OK.
So now, the next project.
Before moving into the next project,'
I'd like to give you a little detail about Bangladesh's"
history and how it came into being.'
This is the map of the Indian subcontinent, as you can see.'
And this map basically shows the Hindu population'
and the density of Hindu population.'
And this image shows the density of Muslim population.'
And you can see, this is the densest Muslim area,'
and these are the densest Muslim areas.'
So, based on these Hindu and Muslim density, to some extent,'
the whole subcontinent was divided into three parts.'
So, one part, of course, we know became India.'
This and this together became Pakistan in 1947.'
And, as you know in history, this'
is one of the largest forced mass migrations'
that took place when India and Pakistan was divided.'
And Bengali was also divided.
Now, my family actually comes from the other side.'
So we had to move entirely to Bangladesh because'
of our Muslim background.
And from 1947 to 1971, it was a struggle.'
Because, though we had our common religion, the rest'
of the things, like our culture or our language,'
nothing really matched.
So there was always a constant tension.'
And finally, in 1971, Bangladesh or East Pakistan at that time,'
wanted to become a free nation.
And that's then it turned into a revolution."
In a way, a struggle.
And that led to a war starting from March 25th'
to December 16th.
And it was an intense war where an enormous amount of life'
was lost.
And this very ground, where this whole event started and ended,'
to some extent, is where my site is'
located for the project of the Major Museum of Independence'
and the Independence Monument.
This image you see here, this is the ground'
where Sheikh Mujibur Raman, our Father of the Nation, actually,'
gave the first speech where he said that we want to be free'
and we want to be liberated.
And in 16th of December, the Allied force,'
Indian and Pakistani forces, in the same very ground,'
actually, had this event of surrender of the Pakistan'
forces.
This is also a place where we have this--'
It used to be horse racing ground.'
So, this was actually a public gathering area.'
And even on our Occupy Movement, or any kind'
of gathering that you see, takes place right here.'
So you see the amount of people that is there.'
So, this site, which is actually located here.'
Is one of the rare green areas that'
is left in the city of Dhaka.
As you see, that it's densely built all around."
That's our parliament complex, right there."
And this is probably one of the last surviving green areas.'
So, to build a museum and a monument'
in a park, an existing park, did not seem like the right thing'
to do.
So, that was one challenge that came with this project.'
The other thing is that it is actually'
a ground which is surrounded by all different kinds'
of cultural spaces.
Like we have our museum here, the National Museum,'
we have the public library and all'
these other different functions are located.'
So, surrounding this area would be'
a lot of public and cultural activities that takes place.'
So, in that sense, it made sense to create something'
in that space.
So what we did, actually, was we took the smallest'
footprint that is necessary for that whole event to take place.'
That's the design we did.
We had a water body, which is a reflecting pool, and a plaza,'
and a elliptical walkway to go around'
to have a view of that image.
So, that's our master plan.
So, this was an existing park that was there.'
We created a connection between this site and that site.'
And a journey, you come here and that's the plaza."
And basically-- so, this is the plan, actually, what you see.'
The way we thought about this design'
was that we wanted to keep the horizontal edge of the park.'
So it does not visually become a building,'
but it turns into a non-building approach.'
And we thought of this whole design as a journey.'
That you start your journey from here, you walk up,'
there is a small monument to the 7th march,'
and then there is this water, a circular water'
body that is actually commemorating this nine month'
long struggle and war.
And at the end is the tower.
And there is a wall that guides you,'
it takes you down into the museum.'
The reason for doing this is that the plaza would'
be for celebration, any kind of celebratory activities'
would be on the plaza.
Because, as we thought of, that the freedom dream, aspiration,'
has a preferred direction, which is upwards.'
Anything that relates to infinity generally'
takes an upward leap.
And, then again, memory or sadness'
always urges the subterranean.
So, we took the whole, entire idea'
of the museum, or the sadness or the history,'
which we tried to embed into the ground.'
So these are the different elements, as you see here.'
That's the museum.
So, what happens if we dig the ramp down.'
First, is an audiovisual room.
You come down and then, these are the different museums'
spaces.
That's the central water that you see on top."
Becomes a central chamber down here.'
And the museum below.
And it draws in a certain water.
The water actually comes into this base'
and becomes a column, or water column.'
And then you go up taking these ramps.'
So, this project, which was commissioned to us in 1998,'
quite right after our graduation from school,'
took us 16 years to complete.
And finally with the tower, it was finished in 1993.'
And since the build project was stalled over the period of time'
because of the government interest in the project or not,'
it has those signs.
As you can see, it bears the signs of this long struggle'
of its own building process.
And one other thing that the government never'
made an initiative, of collecting'
all the documents of the war.
So, what we had is just images.
So we imprinted the images on the glass'
and created this whole space entirely'
made up of the art of images of the whole event of war.'
And that's the central chamber, where"
we don't have any exhibit, but just a water column."
One should just stand there and remember the people'
who were lost in the war.
And then, you come out and basically, with the ramp,'
you go out into the plaza.
I have this small video I would like to--'
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[WATER FALLING]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
So, as you go up into the plaza, you'
see the Independence Monument.
And the Independence Monument, the way we thought of,'
is a tower of light.
So, the Tower of light, the best expression of freedom'
we thought would be light.
And the way we designed it was a tower, which'
was made out of glass.
And glass was not used like a panel or a sheet of glass,'
but glasses were stacked on top of another'
and it created a panel.
And as you see here, these are the panels'
of single-panel, which had thick glass layered'
on top of another.
And it was clad onto the space rim structure.'
This is where you see, here.
Right here you see the panels and the thickness of it.'
And it's clad on to a space frame."
The reason was, we wanted the light'
to be refracted during the daytime,'
so there is refraction of light.
And that's why it creates a certain kind"
of prismatic effect.
And in the evening, this is the tower, which is 150 feet tall.'
And in the evening, it's lit artificially with light,"
so that it is basically a glowing light, tower of light,'
which is a beacon of hope for this young nation, which'
is Bangladesh.
And this is the 16th of December, our Victory Day'
celebration, where you see people being gathered'
and the celebration takes place on the plaza.'
So, this is the city of Dhaka.
And, in a way, one thing that I have found out,'
my way of approaching architecture in the city'
is to bring order into chaos.
And, in many ways, that's what I try"
to do with all the different projects that I've showed you."
And the other thing, what I'm working on in two or three"
different projects at the moment, where'
I'm trying to introduce this whole idea"
of a sense of ownership.
And, in many ways, the Mosque project is one such project.'
So, I'll be showing you the Mosque, here."
So, here is the city of Dhaka, as you see.'
That's where the Mosque is located."
This is the absolute end of the city limit, marked by a river.'
And that's the other end.
And the Mosque, here, which used to be'
an absolute farmland, and not within the city'
limits of Dhaka.
And if you see the images here, 2004 to 2015,'
how the whole area is slowly getting urbanized.'
And its landscape in transformation.'
It's constantly transforming from farm land"
into urban settlements.
And that's my grandmother, who actually commissioned me"
to this project.
The family owned some land in this area.'
And as the city was growing towards that edge,'
and there were settlements being created,'
there was no facilities being provided.'
So, she decided to donate part of her land'
to build this Mosque.
And this, you see here, that's our first groundbreaking"
ceremony.
And you see her sitting there.
And at that time, it was still very village atmosphere'
with farmland all around.
But as we started construction from 2008 onwards,'
it slowly became more urbanized.
So, as I got the project from my grandmother with a small sum'
of money to initiate the project,'
I started looking into the whole history of Mosque,'
and how it came into being.
And if you see, Mosque, how it was initiated in Islam,'
it was basically--
you see here, that's the first Mosque form, which is actually"
built out of a house form.
So, house form was developed into a Mosque.'
So, initially, it had never any kind of symbolic elements'
that we generally identify ourselves with Mosque.'
It was basically a space, which is a space for congregation,'
where people would gather to say a congregational prayer.'
And it was not only used as a space for prayer,'
but also for other activities that took place.'
It was a space for administrative activities,'
it was judiciary, it was communal, social, so all kind'
of activities used to take place in the Mosque.'
And slowly over history, these activities'
have been separated or taken out,'
and slowly, it just turned into a place'
where people worshipped.
So, in a way, I thought, in a place like Bangladesh,'
where you do not get facilities, and you are just'
getting a space, to only use that for prayer would not'
be the right thing to do.
So I decided, in a way, that this space'
should be not only used as a prayer space,'
but also would encourage other form of activities'
in that location.
And, of course, in terms of architecture,'
we see the wonderful legacy that is there'
in the Islamic history.
The Mosque of Cordova.
Hagia Sophia, though it's not a Mosque, basilica."
But then again, the spiritual character'
of the space and the light is just'
enormously inspiring for me.
And if you look into my landscape, which is in Bengal,'
you'll see these beautiful Mosques"
from the sultanate period, from the 13th to 14th century'
Mosques, when Islam actually came to Bengal.'
And at that time, these Mosques were the first, let's say,"
authentic Mosque form that you find in our country,'
or in our landscape.
And this is the situation of Mosques now, in Bangladesh.'
It's just basically stacks of floors."
It has entirely lost its morphology or typology,'
however you want to put it.
It's just not there anymore.
It's invisible.
And, see what happened to the symbols.'
So, as if to have a Mosque, you must have these little things,'
however you put it.
So, that's what I wanted to address."
That you don't really need these elements."
And so, in a way, extracting what'
is essential from the earlier Mosques, which were actually'
the authentic Mosque form, to coming'
to a Mosque which is much more of a contemporary expression.'
And if you see here, these images I'
find quite interesting.
Taken from a book, {} number that was compiled with old'
architecture of Bangladesh.
This, here, you see the monastery'
that I showed you earlier.
A Buddhist monastery.
This is a Hindu temple that's the sultanate buried Mosque."
And that's our parliament building."
So, all different religion, including the democracy'
is a religion, this is what you get.'
And basically, this is what I came up with, as a concept.'
That we had all the, I would say,'
the additional or extra facilities on all these areas.'
And then, I introduced a circular form in a way'
to facilitate this whole rotation of the prayer hall,'
because, as you know, Muslims pray'
in a certain direction, which is to Kaaba.'
So, that's the qibla, we call it."
So to enhance that qibla, I had to introduce'
this circular volume here.
And to make that rotation of the prayer hall.'
And all the edges that you see around here'
are open to sky, to let the air flow'
and to have the entire atmosphere open.'
These are the different drawings.'
So, as you enter from this side, these are the entrance court.'
From there, you basically don't enter into the prayer hall"
immediately.
You turn, either from coming here and then taking'
that route.
Or you could come from here.
Or you could go and do the ablution,'
which is this area, washing, and then you'
can come from that side.
So, that's how the whole entire thing was designed."
And one thing I must mention is the fact'
that the project was built entirely with money'
generated from the community.
So, everybody living in that area,'
they are basically lower middle-income families.'
So, they basically gave whatever amount of fund'
they could possibly give, or in whatever form.'
In a way, I encouraged that in this whole project,'
because it was important to create this sense of ownership.'
That once you have that, once I've built this project"
and I'm out of that, they need to maintain it."
So, if there is not a sense of ownership,'
this will never be maintained properly.'
So that's why it was important to engage them."
And in a way, that engagement actually helped.'
And since it was built with their money.'
I had to be really, very responsible'
about the resources I had.
So this entire area, which is holding'
all the different functions and facilities,'
are built with brick.
Entirely load-bearing brick structure with perforation'
to enhance the airflow.
And in the central space, which is the prayer hall,'
is the only space which is in concrete'
because it had to be a column-free and large space.'
So, you see here in this image, how the whole area is'
transforming slowly.
With new buildings coming up.
The landscape which used to be farmland is not there anymore.'
And that's the building, within its landscape."
So, you don't see any symbolic elements in this building."
You don't see the dome or the minaret."
As I wanted to create that connection of reviving'
this whole notion of the Mosque to be'
used as all other different kind of activities.'
That was the reason why I initially'
decided not to encourage this whole idea of symbolism'
into the architecture.
That's the entrance.
That's one side.
And these are the children who actually'
learn to read Quran, also in that same space.'
You see the side, open to sky spaces'
from where you get the light, and also helps'
with the ventilation.
Also with the acoustics.
And during the day, this is how the light basically'
comes through.
Since we did not have any budget to have it ornate,'
we thought of using light to ornate need the building.'
Light is for free, and it did not cost us anything.'
So, it's all the different kind of light"
and the play of light in that space.'
That's the prayer.
And this is very recently, when we had sort of an Aga Khan'
celebration.
With all the community.
Everybody was there, so we had a nice lunch in that space.'
You see the children who actually learn Quran.'
And there, everybody else from the community.'
And it was a wonderful feast.
You see Farook there.
Farook was there to celebrate.
And, yeah.
So, we've basically transformed the space."
And then, this idea all of a sudden,'
came of, why don't we use it for weddings?"
There is not enough space in that location'
to have wedding facilities, so why not a wedding?'
So, yeah.
So, that's how we'll slowly start using that space"
more than just for prayer.
And for other things, too.
One last project, and then I'm done."
So, basically, this project, where'
we've tried to address this issue of pride of place,"
wisdom of the land, and minimal intervention,'
it's a resort to the southern part of Bangladesh."
This is south of Bangladesh.
You see it's almost like a painting."
This is the Bay of Bengal.
And this dark area that you see, is the mangrove forest,'
the largest mangrove forest, Sundarbans.'
And that's where the royal Bengal tigers actually"
come from.
So, my client, who has this land right up here,'
decided to make this resort.
Which is absolutely in the delta farm land.'
The idea was to celebrate the delta, and the life and living,'
and the authentic experience of Bangladesh.'
And to bring people from the site to the Sundarbans'
through the river ways.
And people could come and spend some time'
and go back to the resort.
So, that's the site right here.
You see how beautifully green, and all entirely farm land.'
And that's the river, which is called Phataker and then"
there's another river which is very narrow, goes through here."
And that's the site where we were to work on."
And from the side, this is the view you get.'
It's absolute farmland.
And there's a bridge right across here."
And surrounding the site, are all these fields'
of [INAUDIBLE], and this is our winter,'
where you see the mustard seeds become absolutely yellow.'
And this is a very, very fertile area,'
from where all kinds of vegetables'
grows everywhere around Bangladesh.'
So, Bangladesh is basically fed from this land.'
So, in that sense, it's an important and unique landscape."
And once you get out of Dhaka, it's"
really a very different landscape.'
Life is slow-paced.
And everything is so much more natural and so different,'
that I, at times, feel like a foreigner'
when I go to the villages myself.'
So, in a landscape like this, how'
do you build with the kind of architectural education'
that I was educated with?
Does it really give me that kind of knowledge'
to go and build something there?
That's where my dilemma was with this project."
And that's why it was very difficult"
for me to even draw a line.
How do I address this?
What do you do?
Because the moment you build something,'
you immediately disrupt the whole dynamics of that place.'
So, that became a kind of a challenge in this project.'
So this is what I wrote to my client.'
"Rural Bangladesh is uniquely beautiful,'
the soul of the delta land.
It feels like a crime to invade the silence with the roaring'
noise of architecture.
This project gives an opportunity'
to bring back the lost pride, and belief'
in the wisdom of the land.
Crafted over hundreds of years of dwelling in the delta".'
And so, what we did was, we started a research,'
and we had some wonderful interns from the Cornell'
University, who went and stayed there the whole summer'
and helped us with this whole process of research.'
What's interesting in building in the delta"
is that the first construction is to dig a pond.'
So, you dig a pond, you dig the earth out, you create a mound.'
And on the mound, basically you place you in buildings.'
What you see here, you dig a pond,'
the earth goes up here, it creates a mound,'
so that, when it rains, the water goes into the pond again.'
And on that, you place your small huts.'
And that's absolutely ingenious.
That's all you need, basically, to build there."
This is one of the villages, which'
was right across our site.
And this is the village that they actually'
made an extensive study on.
What you see here are the huts, these are the huts.'
Small huts.
And these huts are actually enclosing a courtyard.'
It's not a distinctly demarcated courtyard,"
but there's a notion of a space, and the space basically"
flows from one to the other.
And that's how it's created all over."
That's the construction.
You see thatch roof and mud buildings.'
And this is how it's built entirely in that landscape."
So, mud architecture with mud walls, and either tiled roofs,'
or thatch roof.
And if you look into the architecture,'
and this is one thing I try to also dig again'
into the history, to look into what we had in the vernacular.'
Basically, this is a roof form which'
is known as the bangla roof.
And from bangla comes the word "Bungalow",'
and that's something the British brought out of that location."
So, this bangla roof is a very unique roof form,'
from our delta.
And this form was also taken by Akbar'
in the Mughal architecture.
And you see that also in our temples, which were recreated.'
But this is something which is now lost.'
You don't see that anymore.
So, I thought this could be a thing of revival'
in a contemporary manner.
And this is the idyllic image of a village home'
in [INAUDIBLE] in Bangladesh.
So that is something which is, I found, quite unique,'
as well to work with that.
These are the pallet of things that we found in the landscape.'
The colors, the textures.
So, that's how it all began.
So, that's our site.
We had a roadway that would bring our goods'
to the back of house facility, which we decided to place here.'
And people would come from down here.'
This is where the car would stop.'
And they would take a boat ride and come to the site,'
enjoying this whole water scenario.'
And the resort itself is called Panigram.'
Pani means water, Gram means village.'
So, it's a water village idea.
So, this was my initial plan.
Before I started with the site, I'
had to show something to the client, so this is what I did.'
And after we've done the study, this"
is what it sort of turned into.
What we did was, we created these huts'
that would be resorts.
So, you have room for a bathroom.'
And these are all placed in a certain way'
that the space flows from one to the other.'
So, you see the plan here.
These are all 30-inch thick mud structures.'
And with thatch roof.
And another issue that we tried out'
on this project, which is working out really'
well is, again, this whole idea of sense of ownership'
and including the villagers in this whole project.'
So this boy, who is from this village, potter's son."
And generally, a boy of his age has always'
the dream of going to the city and starting a job,'
taking some kind of a job, and then just, in a way,'
getting lost or out of this whole landscape.'
So, what we try to do is engage them in this project,'
in different capacity.
So this is his household.
And that's the pottery village.
So, you see that's what his family does."
And that's the village that he's from."
That's his grandfather.
Making pottery.
So that's the boy.
We basically tried to engage him and we started giving him'
the job of whatever we needed.
And he has no knowledge of making pottery,'
so he went back to his grandfather'
and there was a connection.
Again, created that actually got lost because of the fact'
that he was not interested in the skill anymore.'
So, that is something which is really unique.'
This is our construction.
You see, we are using basically sun-dried mud bricks,'
taken from the kilns before they're fired."
So, these bricks are brought in.
That our plaster, mud plaster.
And that's how its construction is getting done."
The roof.
And the whole project is entirely'
being built by the villagers.
So all the villagers are there.
And they are building the whole thing.'
That's our thatched roof.
Our roof consultant.
That's our organic farm consultant."
Our plaster consultant.
And that's the consultants in a meeting."
So, this is the project.
I don't know if you would call it architecture, because I"
go there, and I just go to the villages houses'
and have a nice feast.
And the rest of the project is entirely'
being built by the locals.
I don't know if you'll call it architecture,"
we could have a debate on this.
But, to me, at this point, in that location,'
this seems to be the right answer.'
[RAIN SOUNDS]
So, that's the monsoon.
And I'll end it here with this monsoon rain."
Thank you.
[AUDIENCE CLAPS]
Would you mind some questions and comments?'
No, not at all.
So, Marina has agreed to take some question or comments.'
Maybe I could just start--
Absolutely.
Maybe-- can I get a mic?
So, this last point about the respect for indigenous building'
techniques.
I mean, you started with the respect for brick.'
And, for a lot of the early projects,'
I was just comfortable in the idea'
that the brick techniques, from making the brick,'
to laying the brick, and even the forms,'
were hundreds of years, centuries old.'
But then, when you got to the monument in glass.'
And, in a way, the tower was not high-tech,'
but it was certainly, it seems to me,'
pushing beyond what any crafts person would do.'
And then, I became more attentive.'
And by the time we were at the Mosque, which is, again, brick,'
and in some photographs looks completely'
blended in with the village.
In others, there seemed to me to be the tales and brick laying'
techniques that are not traditional at all.'
And so, and then, we come to that last project.'
And so, I'm trying to understand,"
when do you push the tradition?
When do you try to make, as it were'
the bricklayer's, innovate?
When do you pull back?
Do they go with you in the innovation?'
Or do they resist?
Could you talk a little bit about how'
those kinds of decisions are made.'
Well, basically every project is different, right?'
So, every project comes with a very different challenge.'
With the site, location, the program.'
So, every project is a different research'
into the different morphology, typology, however you call it.'
And, so, based on that research, like in the Mosque, of course,'
we had this whole idea of taking the essence from the past.'
Sort of extracting what is essential of a Mosque,'
and to take that, and give it a contemporary, much more'
contemporary expression.
And contemporary meaning contemporary'
in Bangladeshi landscape, not in a world scene.'
Contemporary which is possible with the craftsmanship'
of the hand that is being produced in that location.'
So, that's how I try to work.
And, well, definitely, as you've seen in the brick--"
in the Mosque project, we've tried"
to create this perforation.
And it had to be a lot better in structure,'
which is about 25 feet high.
This whole brick work we tried out a few different options.'
So, it's always done on site.
So, we have the brick masons.
I tell them, "Let\'s do it this way".'
So, at times, we bring in brick in the office.'
Or at times we do it on site.
So, we build it to a certain extent'
to see how it works, whether it resists rain water,'
does it let it flow in?
So, those kind of experiments we do.'
And making samples is very, very necessary, definitely.'
And with the mud architecture.
The mud one was the most difficult for us'
because we did not use the local technique of mud construction.'
Because if you go with that, and with such a big project,'
it would not be feasible.
Then it would take 10, 15 years to build it.'
Because it goes very slow.
And we had to employ someone who can build it fast,'
who has the knowledge of brick construction.'
So, in a way, it's mud brick construction."
So, it's again, that brick construction,"
but done in a very different way.'
So, that also needed a lot of experimentation.'
So, how much you can build with mud brick,'
and whether it breaks or not, when'
to plaster it, how much moisture should retain in the bricks'
so that when you plaster, it does not crack.'
So, there are a lot of small innovations and research'
that goes into that project as well.'
And if you see the tower that is made out of glass.'
We never call it glass tower, we call it tower of light.'
So, light, definitely, you cannot build with light,'
but to bring in the effect of light, glass became our medium.'
And even the glass was stacked.
So, in a way, that's also brick in many ways."
So, I think that actually works.
You can find a certain kind of similarity in all of that.'
So, questions, comments?
Thank you, Mrs. Tabassum.
That was a truly impressive presentation.'
Thank you.
And you took me away to my childhood.'
I'm originally from the land of Rumi, from Konya."
The city of Konya, in Turkey.
And I went back to those brick kilns.'
How people actually put that into form.'
How they were baked, and how they were taken out.'
That was beautiful.
Thank you.
And I've never been to Bangladesh,"
but I was impressed with the environment, with the nature,'
there.
But I have one technical question.'
And one, maybe a sort of philosophical question, maybe.'
The technical question is that those white spans,'
where you don't use the columns and then the Mosque."
Do you use post-tensioning techniques, there?'
No.
It's basically beam and column structure."
Beam and columns.
OK.
The architecture and the symbolic parts'
of a Mosque, the minarets.
Well, I think they're important because I see the minarets"
as the lighthouses.
Lighthouses, you know, in the sea, they guide you.'
And whenever I go around, if it's time for a prayer,"
I look for a minaret because they're higher up."
And spiritually, they also guide you.'
So was there any react--
I'm not reacting, I respect your design and everything."
I thought it was a great, multi-purpose sort of Mosque'
there.
But was there any reaction to having your Mosque'
without the minaret?
Well, in Ottoman Mosques, you already always'
had this idea of minarets like, from the Ottoman times, right?'
Yes.
These Mosques that we've seen.
Beautiful Mosques that you have in Turkey.'
I love the Mosques.
I've been to many of those.
And I think that's a very unique feature."
But when I see Ottoman Mosques being replicated.'
Let's say in Dubai or in Abu Dhabi, or even in Dhaka,"
or Bangladesh.
This doesn't seem like the right thing to do."
If you've seen our old Mosques in the Sultanate period,"
there were no minarets.
It was just a regular Mosque.
OK.
We never had minarets.
And if you look into even in the Arabian Peninsula,'
all the Mosques that you see, starting'
from Saudi Arabia to all the early Mosques,'
because I did a study on the Mosques of the Arabian'
Peninsula, the early Mosques.
Which actually became a document for the Abu Dhabi Mosque'
Development Regulation Guideline.'
And at that time, also, it really'
helped me to see the entire early Mosque'
scenario in that area.
And you'll see, rarely, you find minarets."
Dorms there were none.
Except for one small Mosque, which was made out of mud,'
but it was built when the Turkish came and built it.'
So they had these small domes.
Otherwise, they were all flat Mosques.'
So, there was no dome.
But there was, at times, you'd find minarets."
Which are stout.
And very tiny, small minarets.
In Bangladesh, we never had that.'
But later on, as it was a demand.'
To identify, as I mentioned, with this whole notion'
of these forms that it came in.
I did-- there were, from the community,'
they wanted to have a minaret.
But then, we went to do the debate of why would you'
need a minaret.
Except for the fact that, as you mentioned that,'
it acts to identify that there is a Mosque.'
In a way, in Dhaka, you don't need that,"
because people generally know where their Mosques are,'
because they are going there almost regularly.'
On a regular basis.
And, if not, then you always find the Mosque somewhere.'
It's a city of Mosques.
There are numerous Mosques, there.'
And one thing is, as I mentioned,'
that we did not, of course, have the fund'
to build a beautiful minaret, even if we wanted to.'
But the idea was that when you call for prayer,'
there is the sound.
So, the sound goes everywhere.
Do we really need a minaret in that sense?'
When we could use that money to do something else.'
Do I really need to build another form, which'
is really not that necessary.
Because minarets were for the whole idea'
of the sound of the call for prayer to go around.'
That was the original idea why it came into being.'
But now, with the kind of sound systems we have,'
you don't really need that.
So, that was the dilemma where we'
decided that we don't needed.
Thank you very much.
In fact, I agree with you 100%.
When you go to the--
I love the Sinai style Mosque.
But when you go to Qatar, or Abu Dhabi, Dubai,'
it doesn't really fit.
Absolutely, it doesn't fit.
One of my companies, a construction company.'
We'll just finish our fifth Mosque in Qatar,"
in the Salwa Beach Resort, OK?
And I really would like to talk to you about your designs.'
[AUDIENCE LAUGHS]
Thank you so much, it was wonderful.'
Yay!
I got a job.
[AUDIENCE LAUGHS]
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Other comments or questions?
Hi.
Thanks, very much.
I noticed in the picture of the Mosque,'
where you were using it for the Aga Khan celebration,'
that people had their shoes off.
And was interested in, as you think about using it'
for a wedding or for other spaces,'
are you running into issues with how people use a Mosque'
or is that problematic at all?
And then, to draw that question more broadly,'
as you push traditional bricklaying techniques'
or traditional architecture methods,'
do you get any sort of push-back from craftsmen'
or local traditions that are seeing a change that they're"
not used to?
And if you do, then, how do you deal with it?'
Well, we haven't had a wedding yet,"
but I'm sure women will come in their high heels and saris."
We'll have to find a way.
Maybe we could have carpets.
I don't know.
Only for that purpose.
And then, later on, you could take it out.'
I'm sure we could come up with something."
But I'm not pushing it, yet.
Let's see.
We have to go slow, you know?
About the brick techniques or any kind of material'
that we work with, it's basically"
working with the masons or those who'
are actually working in that.
So, I'm not a mason.
I do not know how brick would react.'
I can only give certain hypotheses, perhaps.'
But it's always working with them."
That's why it's very important, the relationship"
that we create with the person who's building it."
I'm just drawing a line.
He's making that wall.
So, he's the more important person than me, actually."
So, that's why it's very important"
that this relationship.
So, in that way, we, whatever idea we have,'
we basically give it to them.
They give us their feedback.
Yes, it's possible.
Yes, it might work, may not work.'
And then, of course, the engineers also get involved.'
So, it's almost like a teamwork of architect, engineer,"
and the workmen or the masons, or whoever.'
The craftsmen, I would say.
So it's a teamwork.
And that's how it gets done.
I've never seen any push-back in that sense."
Not really.
No.
People like innovation.
And if it's done, I mean, a brick wall"
could be laid just a regular brick in a normal fashion,'
or you could create something which actually gives you much'
more than just a brick wall.
It could be a breathing wall.
It could be a lot of different things.'
So then, that's a small innovation, but changes a lot."
So, I think when you do that, people appreciate.'
It's never, I've found any kind of push-back in that sense."
Maybe I can get in with just asking you to educate us'
a little bit more about what's going on now in Bangladesh."
You put yourself in a number of traditions.'
I mean, I was always impressed that you'
do a lot of historical work, but you also place yourself,'
it seems to me, in a tradition of modernism'
where geometrical organizations, the nine square grid'
appears a lot, the circle, where geometrical organizations are'
also at work and mixing with the tradition.'
And the closer you look, and as you work,'
the later work is even more, I would say,'
more personal, I think, than the early work.'
Is this part of a general trend of a new generation'
of architects in Bangladesh?
Is your work or are there other people doing such work?'
Or are there different trends emerging just'
in general, how a younger generation is practicing now'
in Bangladesh?
I can talk about those who are contemporary to me.'
There are quite a few architects who are working--'
I mean, you know that we have a tradition, our architecture,'
modernist architecture was established'
by Muzharul Islam in the 1950s.
And, in a way, to some extent I would'
say that we are basically following'
that same legacy in many ways.
After Muzharul Islam, there was Kazi, Zaif.'
With Muzharul Islam, they formed this group called Chetana.'
And from Chetana, they made a number'
of really unique beautiful publications.'
And, in a way, that is also another generation who'
has immense respect, have shown respect'
for the local architecture.
Much, much more rooted there.
And I think our generation is, to some extent, from that time'
it's much more in a contemporary way"
coming out with another kind of architecture language.'
But I think its there is a certain kind of continuity.'
And it's not only me, of course.
We have quite a few architects who'
are doing tremendously, really good work.'
And, as you mentioned earlier, that we have this Bengal'
Institute, which we formed very recently, and through this,'
we are trying to engage young architects, which'
I think is very necessary now in Bangladesh.'
That we engage these young minds.'
With different kind of multidisciplinary architectural'
ideas.
And engage them not only in buildings, but also'
to develop the whole environment.'
So, that's also something we are working on."
So, there are a lot of young architects.'
Especially awards like this Aga Khan Award.'
actually helps.
And not for me, but for the younger generation'
in many ways, it's a very encouraging thing."
Yeah.
Thanks.
What about female architects [INAUDIBLE]'
Well, we have about 2000 architects who'
are registered as architects.
And among them, I would say, at least 40% are female.'
So, we have a huge female architecture professionals.'
But in practice, you don't see many of them coming like me,"
let's say.
The number wouldn't be too many, who is"
running an office on their own.
So, that is something lacking.
But I think that's something really to work on."
Because, if you go into the schools of architecture'
these days, you'll see 50% of women, 50% are male."
In fact, at times, male is less, and more females.'
So, it's turning into a female profession, slowly."
Especially in Bangladesh's case.
So, I think it's important that we kind of try to engage them"
more into the practice, rather than just working in offices.'
That's very important.
Otherwise, at one point, we'll end up with no practitioners"
anymore.
That would be really something.
Yeah.
Maybe we can convince Marina that this'
won't be her last time.
And she can come as a role model for future practitioners.'
So, warmly ask her to return and thank her.'
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
[AUDIENCE CLAPS]
