So welcome.
And I would like to thank you all for being here'
tonight for the talk by the Brazilian architect, Carla'
Juacaba But first, I will briefly'
mention a few upcoming public programs here at the GSD.'
So this Thursday evening in this room,'
we'll have the Rouse Visiting Artist lecture, with production"
designer Hannah Beachler and cinema scholar Jacqueline'
Stewart.
Friday at the noontime, we'll have"
architect and architectural historian'
Mohammad al-Asad lecturing.
And next Thursday, again in this room,'
we'll have Sou Fujimoto here.
So keep-- stay tuned, guys.
And I'd also like to mention briefly"
that this lecture is generously supported by the Rachel Dorothy'
Tanner Memorial Lectureship Fund.'
So tonight, we are really honored'
to be joined by Carla Juacaba whose experimental work'
spans exhibition design, temporary installations,'
and housing.
And I think this range, this real range of work,'
along with her obvious notable accomplishments within it,'
is particularly-- it's inspiring to those of us here tonight."
Since 2000, Carla has developed her independent practice'
of research and architecture from its base'
in Rio de Janeiro, where her office is currently'
engaged in both cultural programs and private projects.'
Carla was the winner of the first edition'
of the international arcVision Women in Architecture prize,'
honoring her, in particular, for her remarkable and ephemeral'
pavilion Humanidade, for the United Nations Conference'
on sustainable development.
This was a work conceived with the theatre director Bia Lessa.'
And the project opened to a kilometer long line'
of spectators, which, for those of us here, is pretty amazing,'
over half a mile.
I think that's an incredible detail."
In some ways it was a realization'
of Cedric Price and Joan Littlewood's Fun Palace."
Though unlike the Fun Palace, as Carla notes,'
"the pavilion produced not an image of the future,'
but instead tested the capacity of what'
was materially and ecologically possible in the present."'
Carla has worked on many notable house projects, Italia house,'
Rio Bonito house, Veranda house, Santa Teresa house,'
as well as exhibition designs.
She frequently takes part in academic and teaching'
opportunities, as well as research.'
She's lectured recently at the GSD in 2015."
We're welcome to have you--
really welcome back.
Columbia's GSAPP, the Accademia di architettura, Mendrisio."
She's led workshops at the Iuav di Venezia"
and been on the jury of the BIAU, Bienal Iberoamericana'
in Madrid.
So-- excuse me.
Most recently, Carla has contributed'
to the current Venice Architecture Biennale,'
creating the project entitled "Ballast,"'
which was a set of concrete totems in the Giardini.'
Also, she was one of the architects commissioned'
for the Vatican chapels for the Holy See Pavillion,'
which is kind of an incredible project'
that you should continue to check out.'
And Juacaba's chapel, which to me sort of embodies,"
in a single structure, maybe the entire experience'
of the Woodland Cemetery.
It's incredible.
So I really am excited to see that tonight.'
And please, join me in welcoming Carla Juacaba.'
[applause]
Thank you, Jenny, for the introduction.'
Thank you for the invitation and your presence.'
I will begin exactly with the chapel.'
The title is empty space, because I think Peter Brook is'
a theatre director.
And I did a workshop with his [inaudible],,'
which makes me think that it was very interesting to understand'
our discipline through another discipline.'
That is the theatre.
So empty space through him is any space in which theatre'
takes place.
And this beautiful image is from his Magic Flute theatre.'
And he's an English theatre director that lives in France."
And he had a successful company in the 70s, 80s.'
And he uses the expression "poor theatre" for his theatre.'
And what is wonderful to understand about his work is'
that in his theatre, the imagination fulfills the image.'
The image is not complete there.
And he construct that with very poor elements.'
For example, in this image, he move the bamboo,'
and is the cross.
And then in the second moment, it's a forest."
So it's very full of meanings.
And also his sentence, "Is empty space insufficient?'
If the answer is yes, then we begin to study,'
what are the indispensable elements?"'
And I think all his work and theoretical work,'
too, is very inspiring.
And this leanable body chair--
the name of this chair is [non-english],,'
which means chair in the middle of the road.'
She also defines her architecture as poor'
architecture, which obviously, in her case,'
is a direct reference to her Italian context,'
[non-english] context, where she was before moving to Brazil.'
And I really liked those two examples,'
because it is inhabited to leanable'
body seated, and the actors moving sticks of bamboo.'
And I think this is very beautiful, when it's inhabited."
And the sentence of [non-english] about theatre'
is--
the sentence of [non-english] is--'
wait.
"Theatre is very similar to architecture,'
because both involve an event, even'
if this event happens or not."
So this is a sentence that I want to use for this chapel,'
because I think I heard many times'
that the chapel is a sculpture, or the chapel is'
an installation.
But I don't think so.
I think it is architecture, because the event happens.'
It favors this event, as [non-english] says.'
So the chapel is inside--
wait.
The chapel is in the San Giorgio Maggiore'
island, the island in front of Church of San Marco.'
And this island was never open to the public before.'
It's the first time.
So the pavilion of the Holy See is'
taking part of public for the first time'
after 33 years of event.
And Cardinal Ravasi, who is the Pontifical Council for Culture,'
said that it happened because of Papa Francisco,'
because he began his pontificate with a manifest that believe'
in beauty to evangelize.
So all this happened because of Papa Francisco.'
The concept is by Dal Co, Francesco Dal Co, the curator,'
who was inspired by Gunnar Asplund's Woodland"
Chapel, designed in 1924 as the common cementary.'
So here is the island.
In all this green part of the island,'
the 10 chapels are there.
So those are the architects invited for the chapel--'
Berman, United States; Francesco Cellini, Italy;'
Corvalan, Paraguay; Flores and Prats; Norman Foster;'
Fujimori; Sean Godsell; Radic; Souto de Moura.'
And this is the plan.
Here in the entrance of Souto de Moura, which I think'
it was a very nice choice from the curator,'
because he put the heaviest one aside the lightest one.'
And it was very beautiful to see this together.'
This is a video from Francesco Dal Co that's sent to all of us"
to explain the site.
And in a way, it was very good because we'
can feel this water behind, and this light underneath.'
And this is the site.
So we can view that this space is behind the green area.'
And this is the project.
The chapel is made of two crosses, the cross down'
in the bench and the cross--
the standing cross is in fact the cross.'
So these are the two elements, not symbols, but elements'
of the Catholic church.
This is a very old program.
You go to the chapel and sit to look at the suffering that'
is the cross.
So it is a synthesis of this project.'
Forged two beams with 8 meters in length composes the object,'
and it is elevated by this seven concrete elements.'
All the pieces, including the concrete,'
a part has 12 by 12 centimeters.
And I think actually only three of them'
were needed for the foundation, but I'
think seven was give a metric to the drawing, to the design.'
So it gives a measure to the object.'
This is the side plane with this shadow.'
I thought that the projects would be so invisible'
that the shadow would become more evident than the object.'
And this is the lateral view.
And the front view.
I didn't knew when I would propose the chapel,"
but it's simply this cross when the cross is inverted."
So there is the other part is lower'
because then Peter considered himself unworthy'
to be crucified as Jesus.
And this cross became the symbol of humility.'
And I think it is very beautiful to discover'
that after everything was done.
So these are a few detailing drawings,'
and I think it's important to show"
because everything look very easy to do, but it was not.'
The reinforcements were needed inside the bench in the cross,'
and everything should be bolted, not welded,'
because the first idea was to transport'
this chapel to some areas.
But I just knew last week that it will be'
part of the Italian heritage.
And they won't take it out from Venice,"
which looks like a dream for me because it's like--"
I just realized that this is the project of my dream'
because to have a chapel in Venice that will stay there--'
it's amazing.
And now all the bolted parts at the end,'
they are the hidden point where we cannot see.'
So everything there's only one point welded."
That is the junction of the horizontal part'
of the vertical part.
So this is the reinforcement in the welded part--'
it's here, exactly here.
And it is made of--
in the first comment, I didn't knew the material,"
but in the second moment, I decided'
it to be of a highly polished stainless steel'
to reflect the surrounding to not exist.'
So this is the detail for the cross,'
the connection of the cross, the junction between the two parts,'
the horizontal and the vertical.
And this is the foundation, the three points of the foundation.'
And this is where the problem was'
because it didn't went well.
Then at this part we have to weld,'
and this is the final project proposed'
with this part finally welded.
We have a lot of discussions about this.'
And the construction began.
I was not there, but I was following.'
I love this picture of the foundation.'
It looks like small graves.
It's very beautiful inside I think."
And I never associated these concrete pieces'
with an astrology image or astrology form.'
But I have a friend, [inaudible] is a teacher'
from a Catholic university in Rio'
that wrote a thesis about the chapel.'
And she wrote, there is a possible analogy.'
For us it's backbone for the modern cemetery,"
a body reduced to its bone, purified towards the absolute.'
Then during that entire text of [inaudible] is very beautiful,'
but I translated this part because of her reference'
to Rossi's work.
This is her text about the chapel'
and this is the cemetery of the whole scene where'
she took the reference to wrote about this analogy of backbone.'
And this is the first picture I received from Joao Carrilho da'
Graca, the incredible Portuguese architect that were there'
before me.
And I think it's a very beautiful picture"
because it's imperfect.
The sun is exploded here.
I mean, the photographer never take a picture like this,'
wait for the perfect sun.
And this is the very formal opening.'
An aerial view-- and I think the chapel'
is, the intention was to be almost invisible.'
And I think it speaks metaphorically'
about the passage of life, about the existence and nonexistence.'
So sometimes you can see it or not.'
I think that the space of the chapel'
is completed by the surrounding vegetation.'
So there is an interior and there is also an imaginary dome'
between these tress.
Now, as I have said, I heard that this is a sculpture'
or this is an installation.
But I don't think so.
I think it's architects because it defines a place."
There is a program.
And it favors an event, [inaudible] says.'
But I also think that it's very distance from any minimalist"
idea because I think the minimalism abstains completely'
for any kind of symbolism.
And I think this chapel, as well as'
the work of Peter Brook is full of symbolism.'
I have chosen the Souto de Moura chapel'
to show also because it's aside, because it's heavy,"
because it's very Portuguese and heavy."
And this is in a way very Brazilian, I think,'
very related to nature.
This is me, very happy there.
And in those pictures, this looks like it was composed,'
but this priest was there before the opening hours.'
And he was in love.
It was very nice to see.
And this is a video of Gabriel Kogan.'
I don't know how to do.
Is it working?
Yes.
It's a very nice video, I think, because everything moves"
a little bit.
It's beautiful.
And Souto de Moura with his heavy, heavy chapel--'
he was inspired by a small chapel'
built in Minho, a city near to Braga,'
the city Braga in Portugal.
And it's exactly like this at a very close end."
There's no cove.
It's only a place to stay.
This is another homemade with mobile phone,'
but it's nice to see.
And those Instagram pictures that I'
love because there's people and it's very, very spontaneous."
And it's nice.
And this is the chapel of Souto de Moura that is here.'
This is the entrance here.
And now I brought the money to that pavilion'
again because I've been here three years ago presenting"
this project.
But it was important to bring because I'm"
going to show that there was a commission to continue building'
in the city of San Paolo in the center and in Brasilia.'
But the crisis in Brazil began in 2014,'
and everything has stopped.
But I'll show the idea of this project."
And it's not yet a project, but it's an idea."
And the pavilion is here in this peninsula'
between Copacabana and Ipanema.
And this is the timelapse of the construction.'
It was constructed in six month, and the project'
was four months.
As has been said, there was 200,000 people'
visiting in two weeks.
And the idea came from this--
I mean, Copacabana in Brazil is like the stage.'
Everything happens there, all the events, all the--'
so the base of this construction was already there,'
and we've put white plastic tent over that."
And what I proposed was to take out the plastic tent'
and continue scaffolding walls that were already there.'
So I understand this building as a response to our time,'
to our idea of sustainability in this location,'
in this geographical point.
Well, it's very site specific.
So there's no historical images about sustainability"
because this, in fact, a direct response'
to this context into this preexistence.'
And it's there.
So the walls were already there, those walls,'
but were five meters high.
And this is the constructions that they do every year,'
and this is what happened.
They took out the plastic tents and continued those walls.'
And the project was happening between the walls'
and also in the subtraction of those walls'
for the prep for example, the auditorium for 500 people.'
This is the line, an immense line.'
And this is the corridor that was already there,'
already exists.
And then the idea for Brasilia is a very hard place'
to think about anything because the project of the [inaudible]'
project is from Lucio Costa and the work of Oscar Niemeyer.'
And it's a very hard scale to intervene, to propose anything."
So it took me a very long time to find this idea of project.'
This is that the drawing only to remember this.'
This is the drawing Lucio Costa.
This is a cross in this very isolated and central part'
of Brazil, very desert.
And he won this competition with this drawing,'
and this is the first symbol of the cross'
of possession of a territory.
So in this curve here appears, which'
was adapted to the local topography'
in the outflows of the water.
So this looks like a boat because of that.'
So this is a pretty known picture of Brasilia,'
and you can feel already this scale of someone that is here.'
It's an unreachable scale.
It's very hard to work.
And this is the aerial view.
This is the center area of the ministries.'
This is all the ministries.
And this is the Congress at the end, right here.'
And the idea was very simple at the end.'
It was to repeat one of those ministries.'
It was the same height, the same measure,'
the same distance between them in this first space here.'
So the proposal is almost like urban readymade.'
It is there, and as any readymade,'
it wants to be indifferent to any kind of beauty.'
There's a complete absence of design also."
So it would be constructed also of scaffolding'
but of these dimensions.
And this could be the sequence of the [inaudible] pavilion'
there.
And I name it ministry of all, because it's"
a site of all the ministers.
And in San Paolo, it's another project."
It is in this area here of--
this is really the center of San Paolo.'
This is the station, and this is the project [inaudible]..'
[speaking portuguese]
And then it's project that in the central area here"
to the stations, and this empty area here.'
But the project could be situated'
in any place with the same characteristics'
and the same problems because it's not about this place"
exactly.
It's about a reflection about emptiness in abandoned"
spaces in central areas.
So especially in central area, I mean,'
because it's very active areas with these immense gaps."
So the proposal is not to resolve this problem, this gap.'
In the contrary, it emphasizes the problem.'
It's also an idea of continuity of the [inaudible] pavilion."
So it would be also temporary.
So I think these empty areas in places'
like this is very common in Latin America.'
And what I proposed is--
and I think also that those empty areas, it's like a space"
that no one ventures to cross this space.'
It's like a rupture.
I mean, no one wants to traverse this.'
It's very empty.
And there's like an imaginary wall I think."
So the project is, in fact, a wall'
that emphasizes this rupture.
And the problem because it becomes more evident,'
and the building's a symbol of the problem."
So it is projected over the existing roads, now secluded'
by scaffolding walls.
And there is this one only floor that everything happens'
with 5,000 square meters.
And I name it only to name--
San Paolo observatory [inaudible] place for exhibit'
and discuss the city of San Paulo.'
It invented a program to continue this idea.'
So, on the contrary of a solution,'
this temporary building proposes to reflect'
about urban problems, about interstitials'
and forbidden places.
And it's obviously a fantasy.
And I will change the subject completely now to the projects'
that I'm working, housing projects and exhibition design"
projects.
The common characteristics of all these houses'
is that they are situated in the perimeter of Rio de Janeiro,'
and in this perimeter between the city'
and the forest, the preserved area.'
And also what they have in common'
is that they are very inexpensive houses, and never'
bigger than 160 square meter.
So this is the plan.
The house develops as pavilion parallel to the country lines.'
It is totally adapted to the terrain in two levels,'
invisible from the street.
It is in the central region of Rio.'
So the first challenge was to develop an inexpensive project'
and not too big.
And so I proposed this very lightweight structure, each two'
meters.
And it made the project possible because it was very cheap.'
And so this is the living room here and connected'
with this corridor to the room.
And there is only one--
how can I say this--
rigid line, 42 meters of rigid line'
with different inclinations of the roof.'
So that's it.
So the roof is the most important element'
of the design with four different inclinations,'
different materials.
And this is the gallery that connects everything,'
very close to the street and very open to the view.'
And I think this is the protecting of the project.'
And it becomes a flashlight at night.'
And this is another house, very close to just one, I think.'
I'm not sure if I presented this one."
This is, again, a reference to read this [speaking portuguese]'
that needs a knife and a support and a neck, too.'
And this is an inspiring image for this project,'
I think, because this house, the Neimeyer House Varanda'
was made in 2008.
And I think the site was incredibly beautiful,'
and I had the feeling that I was destroying something.'
[inaudible] said once that sometimes construct'
is to destroy.
So finally, I was not trying to hide the house'
in any side of the terrain.
The house cutted the terrain in two.'
And the skylight, with this skylight here,'
emphasized this decision of cutting the terrain in two.'
It's 60 centimeters by 24 meters of skylight."
Finally, the last presence I was looking for'
had to very incisive.
The central is the living room, and the bedrooms'
in the extremes.
This is also-- the commission was to be very inexpensive.'
This is the most inexpensive roof, and everything else also.'
So the parallel walls was a support for this light.'
This is important, also, in this house I think.'
There's an immense with one meter and a half of--"
the roof is projected one meter and a half.'
So you open the windows when it's raining, not the contrary."
And this one, the last exhibition design'
that I did in Instituto Moreira Salles in Rio de Janeiro.'
"A Viagem das Carrancas" is the name of the exhibition,'
and "carrancas" is a sculpture with a human or animal form.'
And it is used in the frontal part of the boat in the Amazon'
River.
And this gained with time a cultural value.'
So Lina Bo Bardi in the '60s, also"
did an exhibition with this sculptures.'
And it was very beautiful, her exhibition, I'
think because she did a very high support to make'
the sculptures like they are in the boat in the high point.'
So you can see it.
So I think it gave anotherness to the sculpture.'
And I decided also to do like her,'
to put it in a higher position, but with a very different'
design.
This is another exhibition in the modern art'
museum about Brazilian jewelry, and I have one or two pictures'
of this.
And it's a sinography, is many times."
I mean, it's like a scenery.
This is pieces of glasses like as a reference to the water,'
where the stone where the jewelry came from.'
This was very nice.
And this is Ballast, the project that'
was an invitation of Yvonne and Shelley.'
It was good to show this project,'
but didn't really work out as we wanted."
So it was a response to Free Space Manifesto that'
evokes a general and very democratic space,'
yet they give an example--
they give many examples in the manifest, but one of them'
is the Medici Palace in Florence that'
represented power and wealth but with a stone seat, which'
forms part of the solid facade, almost'
turns the beauty inside out.
This is what they wrote--
the solid wall becomes the enclosing of the public space.'
So it's like a general piece, they said."
So the idea, the proposal was to do for the Biennale'
a bench with 32 meters long, three benches'
of 32 meters long for people to sit to rest in the Biennale'
because they are always tired in the Biennale.'
So I understand the democratic space'
where everyone can sit and lay.
So this was made--
the proposal of this bench was to use'
is Navy ropes, which is something'
that we see in Venice all the time and a reference'
also to the city defenses in the project.'
In the project, that would be like these cables of Navy ropes'
and these pieces of concrete to different pieces'
but disposed differently.
And they wanted to do that, Yvonne and Shelley,'
but that was very expensive, because I'
learned a lot about cables.
I know nothing about cables, but it looks very'
light for this heavy piece.
But it's not.
This was not enough to the strength'
of this cable, the horizontal strength of this cable.'
So this was supposed to be made with a very special concrete,'
which made everything very expensive and not able'
to do that.
But we found out that in February, and I said no.'
So we don't do anything.
And they said, no, we're going to do"
at least to show this project and at least do'
a prototype of this.
And it was an idea, but I don't think it was--"
So this was the idea of these benches.'
Inside, of course not, but it was in the exhibitions'
to show the inside.
And the problem of cable-- this took us many,'
many months to study this and many months of work'
to make this work.
And finally, it was impossible.
So we did finally protoype--
wait-- one third prototypes of the size of those'
blocks only to exhibit, but finally it was not a bench.'
It was not a sculpture, but it was an intention'
to show the project only.
And this is the very simple foundation at the end,'
but they didn't approve this in Venice"
because it's not possible to do 25 centimeters of a foundation."
So the pieces of concrete, they are big like this, three meters'
and 60.
And they get stability only when they are together.'
And this is the protoype.
So in the garden of the Giardini--'
the Giardini where the work of this is.'
So the work is there, the work that'
has the name is [speaking portuguese]..'
So finally, it was nothing, but it was an experience.'
But people sit at the--
and use it like this, too.
And I'm going to return to the chapel to show that it became--"
the kids really have fun with this chapel,'
and I was not expecting this.
But it was very nice to know, and this is my son having fun.'
He says, my mother chapel is very fun.'
So it's very good to hear that.
Thank you very much.
That's it.
[applause]
I was worried to bring a project that I already showed before,'
but that's OK.
I'm going to open up to the audience's questions."
Anyone want the mic for anything?'
Oh, yes.
Oh, we a second mic.
Thank you.
Hi, thanks so much for sharing your projects with us.'
I'm curious-- for working in a context like Santa"
Teresa in Rio where you also have the well-preserved turn'
of the century architecture as well'
as some great modernist gems.
I was wondering whether it was of any concern of working'
in that context of how to respond'
to these different traditions of Brazilian architecture.'
I was not worried.
The context is always a lot of nature,'
and these houses are very far.
And it's not really something to worry about."
It's more like I respond to this context, how to--"
I mean, that was a first project, very expensive,'
that the house was floating there,'
and it was impossible to do.
And then finally, the decisions to put really on the floor'
to make it inexpensive.
But this is sometimes not very good for you'
because of the humidity there.
So it was more a decision about cost.'
So that's it.
Hi, thank you for talking to us.
I was wondering-- for the piece that you tried out'
at the Biennial, why did you say that it isn't a sculpture?"
Because finally, it is a sculpture, if you want,'
but it was supposed to be a support of a bench.'
And it was-- yes, this was the idea,'
not to be a sculpture in the garden.'
So that's why.
So this is a prototype finally.
Thank you for being here.
I think one of the most compelling things'
about your projects was this chapel and the video of it'
sort of like trembling with all the leaves and stuff.'
So I guess in light of these discoveries,'
how would you design in the future'
to more of these happy, little strange things--'
I don't really get the question, sorry."
Can you plan for the happy trembling of the chapel?'
Was that anticipated?
Do you design for encountering nature in that specific way?'
It's a question?
Maybe it's not a question.
I just think it's cool.
I mean, I think maybe a way of saying'
that is, do you feel like you encounter'
your work differently?
And once it's in the world, does it"
produce other facts that you might not have anticipated?'
Is that what you're saying, Frankie?"
You mean, it's in Venice.
So it's another context.
That's it.
That's maybe the question.
In any of the work, does it exist on its own'
in ways that you couldn't have anticipated"
and that you might then plan for in the future?'
I still don't get.
I'm sorry.
I'm very sorry.
So you wanted to make a seat, right?'
And you spent a lot of time thinking about this seat,'
and you came up with a structure to make'
the seat with the ropes and everything possible.'
In the end, this was not possible.'
And so you have the remnants, the leftover of an idea.'
But the person who was asking the question'
was saying, well, what you ended up with, you'
didn't want it to be a seat.
You wanted the rope to be the seat.'
But now you'll have people enjoying"
your structure, which was not planned to be a seat now used'
as a seat.
So is it possible to think about something that is not planned?'
This was not planned to be a seat.'
So the idea of unintended consequences'
are sometimes very interesting.
Can you imagine thinking about a slightly different way'
of working where something like the structure'
is actually the seat, not a rope anymore?'
So this could also be a way of thinking.'
I think this is maybe a little bit part of it.'
I mean, it also relates to the beginning of your presentation'
about Peter Brook because part of the discussion with Peter'
Brook is about the idea of architecture'
as a kind of setting, as a situation,'
as a theater in a way.
It's a space of performance.
So if you work in this way, you also'
start imagining how your son is going to be playing with this.'
So I think this connection between the event, the theater,'
and architecture is very important in your work,'
even though you don't say it so explicitly."
So this, I think, is interesting,'
whether you see in your work this connection to theater'
and to the idea of situation.
And what is the possibility of architecture when you'
think about it in those terms?
I think this kind of speculation, I think, for us'
and for the students is probably an interesting thing'
to discuss.
Yes, for example, the project of Brasilia.'
It's not a project yet, but it's something to develop."
But I think-- and there's a crowd where you are"
seeing that there's no design.
There's no sense of design there because it's as any readymade."
And I would be very curious to develop this and see'
the life inside this that have no idea what it is'
and the program of that.
So maybe this is an open project to think'
about this and this thing that we don't know."
I think this line of questioning is very interesting.'
I wonder if you can elaborate a little bit more'
about this relationship that you have with art and architecture.'
I understand you studied under Lygia Pape.'
And I don't know if there's a new concrete art"
lineage in your work that's very participatory because I find"
it very interesting when I hear you talk about Peter'
Brook or [inaudible].
There's always this theatrical element,"
and then you talk about Rossi, which is, on one hand,'
for him architecture is architecture or the background'
for activities or the state.
I wonder if you see some conflict between them,'
or maybe it's not a conflict, or something"
that fused together with this kind of art background'
and think of architecture as something that's much more"
internal and intrinsic.
Even when you talk about your strategies as art terms,'
as found objects or [non-english],,'
it's very interesting in your way of thinking and this"
relationship between this architecture thinking and art'
thinking.
Yes, I think I'm still thinking about this,"
but I think there are actually projects'
that are a response to a reflection that'
is not exactly as--
for example, the project of San Paulo,'
it doesn't want to be a project of architect."
It wants to be a response to a reflection of this emptiness,'
but it doesn't want to be a project at the same this."
It's in between exactly because the reflection is in between--"
I mean, it's not product of architect"
or that will make the site better.'
No, it make the site worse.
So it's the contrary.
So it is something to think about.'
It is.
Hi, I was just wondering if you find'
that there is a central element or a motivation to your work'
that happens either intentionally'
or unintentionally across the board.'
Yes, I think I always need something to provoke a problem.'
This is in Brazil or San Paulo or--'
I could never imagine to think of a project just to think.'
I mean, if there's no problem to think,"
there's no program to think.
So then the next project is--
I cannot think of the next project because I need'
a problem.
So it's a response to a problem.
Or in this case of San Paulo, Brazil invented a problem'
to build something that I don't know it's such architecture"
or art because it doesn't--
architecture wants to resolve problems and make life better.'
And so that's not the proper question."
Hi, over here.
Thank you for a presentation.
So I've see in your architecture a theme lightness, openness,"
and transparency.
And I was wondering if you could talk a little bit more'
about the aesthetic and tectonic choices'
and the reasons behind those choices.'
Do you agree with me?
Yes, I think, when I said that the chapel was very Brazilian,'
I think the Brazilian architecture'
always this obsession of floating things.'
I mean, in San Paulo architecture, you can see that.'
And so, it's part of our of this line that floats always."
That's why the Souto de Moura is very Portuguese and heavy."
And I think this is very Brazilian'
because it wants to have a suspended line as the bench'
also, even in the heavy support.
So I think there is this reference.'
You asked also about Lygia Pape.
Because the school I studied with--'
she left the school when I was there,'
but it was very interesting because she kind of constructed'
the school of architecture but her conceptions of art.'
So when I arrived there, the exercises'
were constructed by her.
It's funny because her work is known"
but not her academic work.
And she's very experimental and very interesting."
So I think it is very important, this thing,'
but it was not direct of her.
If there's one last question, we can take it."
Otherwise, thank you so much, Carla.'
It was really incredible.
Thank you so much.
[applause]
