Hi everybody.
Hi, I'm Diane Davis.
I'm the chair of the Department of Urban Planning and Design,"
and I'm going to get us started because we are actually-"
this event is going to go until 1:30 and not 2:00.'
And I don't want to take away too much time from us--"
this collective group to be able to have the great pleasure'
to listen to Richard Sennett speak to us today about--'
possibly about his new book, but also'
a series of projects that he's been working on for a while."
The title of his lecture is called "The Open City"'
and we'll hear more about that in a second."
Again, I don't want to take up too much time to--"
well actually I could not possibly begin to, kind of,'
reiterate everything that you need'
to know about Richard Sennett.
His bio, the number of awards that he's had,"
the kind of esteem that he's held"
in many different disciplines related'
to design, sociology, history.
You name it, he's kind of one of the leading intellectual voices"
of contemporary, I can't even say American, academia,"
but also globally working now in and living'
in London part of his time.
I do want to say that he's a professor at both--"
a professor of the humanities at NYU'
as well as a professor of sociology at the London School'
of Economics and Political Science.'
And the chair of [? theater mundy, ?]'
an organization we might actually'
hear a little more about.
He's been a visiting--
distinguished visitor and recipient'
of awards at multiple major universities around the world,'
including Cambridge University, universities'
in Germany, Italy, et cetera.
But the other thing that I wanted'
to mention a little bit about Richard Sennett's"
extraordinarily deep and important published work.'
If you take a look at his CV and the number--'
he's basically published a book like every other year"
from maybe 1970 or something like that.'
On a personal note, I want to mention'
that when I was in college in Chicago'
I remember reading one of his first books,'
it was not the first one, "Families Against The City."'
An amazing book about, kind of, migration, culture, equity,'
inequality, and, kind of, collective consciousness that'
blew my mind as an urban sociology major.'
Probably had something to do with continuing'
to study sociology myself.
And he's written a series of major books"
that you all have heard about.
"The Uses Of Disorder," "The Fall'
Of Public Man," a book on authority, "Flesh and Stone:'
The Body and the City in Western Civilization,"'
"The Conscience of the Eye."
And these last two are really oriented'
towards the design professions in ways'
that maybe the earlier books were'
oriented towards historical urban sociology.'
A book called, "Respect in a World of Inequality,"'
"The Culture of New Capitalism."
I'm going to ask you about capitalism"
later actually because that's kind of dropped out."
It's come and gone in your [? ove. ?]"
More recently in 2008 "The Craftsman"'
which also a really well received book.'
And recently in 2012 Yale University Press, "Together:'
The Rituals, Pleasures and Politics of Cooperation."'
I'm wondering whether in that especially that last issue"
of how people work together, or live together,'
is a theme that has gone way back to families'
against a city.
It's threaded through most of your work,"
and I think it's going to be part"
of what you\'re talking about in your lecture on "The Open'
City."
So without further ado, my--
I'm so pleased to introduce Richard Sennett."
[applause]
Thank you.
You know that I was a student here.'
I was a architectural dropout, so I'
went into Arts and Sciences, because I'
couldn't hack architecture.
But I've taught here off and on all my life,"
and I'm teaching Elements now.
And it's really such a pleasure for me."
This is really home for me, the GSD.'
So I'm really glad to be here.
What I thought I would do today, is describe to you'
some ideas that oriented me and others'
who have worked on a project for the UN called Habitat.'
Habitat is a project of human habitat UNESCO.'
And please do not ask me why the Americans have dropped out'
of UNESCO.
I'm so sick about talking about this."
UN-Habitat, UNESCO, the World Bank and the IMF.'
And it takes a look at the state of the global environment'
once every 20 years.
Now I'm so old that I attended the first of this in 1976."
And this was my third Habitat meeting,'
and I was one of the chairs of it.'
I don't think I'll make it to Habitat IV,"
but I want to describe to you what we were trying to do.'
Basically, in the intellectual part of Habitat--'
which concluded a year ago in Quito,'
and whose scientific papers-- that is academic papers--'
are published next week by Elsevier--'
a huge pile of these papers.
What we were trying to do is put together an idea of planning'
and an idea of design.
That is a very GSD-like project.
But we were trying to do this in a context'
where, more and more, particularly'
in the developing world, they're separated to the detriment"
of both.
So I'm going to just talk a little about how"
we try to see the physical and the social parts of the city'
together.
I haven't talked about this before."
So tell me if something doesn't resonate."
You tell me.
But the idea about this is to understand'
what a city should be in its physical,'
and its socioeconomic and political economy.'
How do you put those two together?'
In my own view, what a city should be'
is a place which enriches experience.'
And that means, practically, a question'
of opening up opportunities economically.'
But socially and psychologically,'
it means managing complexity.
That an open city is one in which people become--'
thanks to the way the city operates,'
and the way it's designed--
becomes a place in which people are'
more and more skilled in managing'
complex conditions of life, and taking advantage'
of opportunities which are unforeseen, accidental, et'
cetera.
Now I would say that cities today are not enabling either.'
They're becoming particularly-- under the aegis of global"
capitalism--
ever more rigid, crude, and closed.'
Jacob Burckhardt, the 19th century historian,'
talked about the age of brutal simplifiers.'
He meant nationalism.
He looked forward to Trump.
But I think in urbanism today, we are in a different way,'
under the shadow of this age of brutal simplifiers.'
And in Habitat III, I and my group--'
which is Ricky Burdett and Saskia Sassen--'
asked what we might do to open the city physically up,'
so that people's experience in it could be more complex,"
and their ability to manage difficulty and complexity'
could expand.
And before I go on to describe this,'
I want to thank Clay, who was one of our researchers'
on this project.
The UN is not, I must say, a very efficient organization.'
And Clay managed to deal with her inefficiencies beautifully.'
One thing we tried to do in looking as concept'
of the open city, was to take it not'
so much as a kind of planning instrument,'
but as a set of propositions that people'
would bounce off of, and react to either positively'
or negatively.
But it's an idea that tries to see the city whole."
So let me start by saying, what does complexity mean?'
For Aristotle, it meant synoikismos.'
That is, a coming together of oikai, which are'
like extended family groups.
And famously, you may know, that he wrote in the Politics,'
that a city cannot come into being by people who are'
the same.
It has to come into being--
the gathering together the synergy--'
of people who are different--
These different oikai.
Practically, that meant-- in terms of combining people--'
for the sake of defense, or for the sake of trade.'
But it also means something politically,'
which is, people learning how to account points of view'
unlike one's own.
That is, to acquire the skills to deal'
with people unlike oneself.
So this notion of synoikismos contains in it'
an idea that there is a kind of craft required'
to be able to identify, understand, combat,'
and work with people who are different than oneself.'
It's a fundamental, it seems to me,"
principle of urbanism ethically.
When we started out confronted by masses of planning'
statistics about growth patterns in various parts of Central'
Africa and Southeast Asia, we looked at this large body'
of reports and so on.
And Saskia Sassen said, let's just junk it for the moment,"
and let's ask ourselves what it means ethically"
for a person to develop the skill for dealing with people'
to practice synoikismos.
The UN officials, they blanched a bit, but we did it.'
And here is my own take on how this works.'
The ethical framework for dealing'
with people who are unlike oneself,'
is exemplified in a classic conflict between two'
Jewish theologians--
Martin Buber and Emmanuel Levinas.'
For Buber-- as those of you, whether you are Jewish or not,'
may know--
the idea of the ethical relationship between people'
is expressed as an I-thou relationship.'
That is, that the more that you know about somebody'
else, or interact with them, the more intimate and closer'
you come to them.
It's hard to render in English, but it's the difference"
between you and thou.
You is impersonal.
Thou is a more personal--
[? ich ?] und Du in German, and so on.'
The idea for Buber, therefore, was'
that if you mix people together the more they interact,'
the more they'll understand each other."
Whereas for Levinas, the important thing'
was the dash that separates I and thou.'
That is to say that there is an unbridgeable difference'
between people when they come together.'
They don't integrate, they don't unite,"
they don't form a community.
Instead, they become neighbors to each other.'
And the concept of neighbor, for Levinas,'
is somebody who is aware of another intensely,'
but is separated by that dash from ever fully becoming one'
with them.
And this, to me--
and you'll see in these massive statistical reports--"
is a kind of insight that we've tried to apply--"
this Levinasian notion of the neighbor--'
to the urban condition.
It requires skill to be intensely aware'
of somebody else, to interact with them,'
and yet not to try and abolish the boundaries between self'
and other.
It's a particularly urban concept"
because the Levinasian version of the neighbor,'
is something that allows strangers to remain stranger'
in some sense, to each other.
Which doesn't suppose the local community is ultimately"
the ethical foundation of a city--'
it's moral foundation.
That people can remain apart, and yet mutually'
aware and interactive.
So this notion of the neighbor is'
a peculiarly urban condition.
So the question was, it's not just a matter of a good heart."
It's a skill in dealing with that hyphen."
And the question for us was, how do we'
translate this into the every day experience of people'
in cities?
I took a step long ago, in my own mind,'
towards answering this question, when I worked at MIT.'
You know that place that's down the river?"
I taught planning there for a while.'
And my office was next to the Media Lab.'
And a lot of the people-- this is in the 90s--'
in the Media Lab at that time, were interested in Open Systems'
Theory.
And for me, I began to fill in this kind of ethical vision'
early in my own thinking, by thinking about the city'
as an open system--
that the more open it is, the more'
this peculiar urban condition of neighborliness can develop.'
What do we mean by an open system?'
What I remember from that time is'
that the Media Lab was filled with people'
reinventing the world.
They made a contrast between open and closed'
via a a contrast between Microsoft--'
which was a donor to the Media Lab--'
and themselves.
They thought of a Microsoft experiment as closed,'
and a Media Lab experiment as open.'
What does this mean?
First of all, it meant exploration--'
open-- versus hypothesis testing--'
which is closed.
Second, it meant a non-linear process of research--'
as in a rolling experiment--
versus a predictable path of outcomes.'
It's the difference, in mathematical terms,"
between Boolean logic--
which is yes-no logic--
and Bayesian logic-- which is a more open--'
in which the word may be, or it's"
probable, but not certain--
comes in.
That introduces an element of nonlinearity.'
And finally, it introduced the notion of--'
very proud of-- the ability to fail,'
and to learn from failure.
Whereas, the economics of a closed system'
are such that failure is not an option.'
That you always have to produce a result'
rather than abort a problem.
All of these-- as I saw from the work that these Media Lab'
people were doing--
had a kind of ethical dimension which many of them'
didn't know about.
Because they were celebrating the open--'
openness to the unknown.
They were celebrating the other in Levinasian terms,'
rather than familiar interactions with which people'
became more and more familiar.
So I began to think then, how would a city model itself'
on this kind of an open system?
And that's-- as I said-- this was long before I worked"
for the UN, I've worked for the UN for 40 years off and on."
But I didn't put this together with the planning work I was"
doing for the UN at the time.
But I began to think, even before practical things which'
I'm going to show you, that the translation of an open system"
into a city has three aspects.
First, that socially, an open city is dialogical--'
that economically, an open city is synchronous--'
and that politically, an open city'
is always to the left of its nation state.'
These have become guiding principles for me'
in thinking about the city as open,'
and I'd like to explain them.
The term dialogical, as you probably know,'
is derived from Mikhail Bakhtin, the literary critic,'
but also social critic, put to death by Stalin in the 1930s.'
It focuses on the process of exchange'
and the unlikely processes of exchange--'
first of all, in literature-- but secondly,'
in ordinary language communication,'
rather than looking at discourse as a means to the end'
of taking a decision.
I don't know of any of you study decision-making theory."
It's fundamentally hostile to the notion"
that discourse is a means to an end, which puts an end'
to discourse itself.
The idea about this, as it becomes something in the city,'
is the unified action, or the decision to act together--'
that kind of coming together in that Martin Buber way--'
is something that is replaced by a notion of a process, which'
is more important than the plan that it makes.'
Very hard for us to think that way.'
We think about planning as you talk,'
you look at the alternatives, you make a decision,'
and then you do it.
That's not dialogical.
The dialogical thing is always a rolling self-edit of a plan.'
A plan is a proposition which is completely, if you like,'
subject to feedback.
In the World Bank--
to just translate this into practical terms--'
we have come-- or they, I have to say--'
they have come to understand the dialogical principles are ways'
to avoid many of the top-down, rigid, and often'
disastrous decisions they took about finance development.'
People are trained in listening skills and learning'
to be silent, using non-combative language,'
and most of all, speaking informally,'
rather than always to the point.
It creates messy and inefficient meetings,'
but they're also much more involving because"
of their very informality.
And this is something that is, I think,'
built into any open system.
That it's dialogical in focusing on self-correcting"
or self-revising processes, rather than looking'
at discourse as a means-to-the-end of action.'
The second aspect of an open city to me,'
economically, is it's synchronicity--"
which simply means that many things are happening at once.'
This goes back to Aristotle.
When Aristotle thought about the synoikismos, what'
he was thinking about is that all these different oikai,'
these tribes I guess you could call them--'
in Greek they're called tritis--
anyhow, let's not go there--
that they did different things.
So his question was, how do you put together'
an economic activity in which some people are making pots,'
other people are making spears, in which some people are'
banking, and other people are doing'
something very different-- medicine'
or something like that.
The idea of synchronicity is that there'
is no coordination between these activities'
of a superordinate kind.
That is, they interact, but there's not"
an overarching principle that binds them together into one'
coherent form of activity.
And for Aristotle, the notion was'
that the cracks that open up between these uncoordinated,'
but related and interacting activities,'
opens up the sphere of economic opportunity.'
So you know I started thinking about this.'
This isn't just about the Ancient Greeks."
That the way in which you get opening up a city economically,'
is precisely by making those interstices where'
new things can be developed, where'
people can be entrepreneurial, rather than doing the kind of--'
as the World Bank used to do--
I don't mean to pick on them, as I worked"
for them for a long time.
But as it used to do.
Which is to say that what you wanted'
was coherence in economic planning.'
That, for Aristotle, was the death of a city.'
For us, when we started thinking about--'
Saskia particularly-- about economic activity'
in modern cities in the developing world today--'
we have to call them emerging cities by the way, [inaudible]'
is that how can we plan those ruptures?'
That is, how do we create incoherences economically,'
that allow those interstices which open people up?'
And that goes back to the issue, Clay,'
that you and I were working on, which is informality.'
But it's economic activity understood as informal"
in the sense that it's synchronous,"
which means that it's relatively uncoordinated."
OK-- Oh God, I'm talking too much."
The third aspect of an open city,'
is that the open city should be to the left of its nation'
state.
In a way, this is perfectly and empirically obvious to all'
of you in the United States, which is large cities that are'
complex, and have many elements are--'
like New York and Boston--
much more to the left than their nation states.'
We mean this, I think, in a more structural form, which is,'
that the work of legislating a nation state'
is essentially the work in most developing nation states,'
of achieving closure on the informality of the city.'
That's the dynamic we were playing with."
So the nation state is, in a way,'
it's principles of political operation-- constitutional,"
as well as dictator centered--
are things that close down this self-revising process simply'
by the formulation of laws that apply to all the conditions'
in the nation state.
So what we're really arguing is that every open city is not"
so much socialist as anarcho-sydicalist.'
That that's the opposition.
That's the left we're interested in."
That it's out of necessity.
The more open it is, the more it escapes the nation states'"
desire to create order.
I don't want to get lost in the relationship between Catalonia"
and Spain, but it's a perfect example of this."
OK well, these were then, some of the principles how we work.'
We started backwards.
We started with values--
the scientific committee for this year's Habitat III."
Those values are the values of open city.'
It's founded on something that's very fundamental, which"
the idea of synoikismos.
The values are more Levinasian than they are Buberian.'
That technically those values translate'
into the ideas of an open system,'
and that an open system, such as you'
can see it in technical practice,'
translates into a city is an open system'
via the principles of dialogicalism, synchronicity,'
and anarcho-syndicalism.
That's where we were.
Now, I have to say that there were several people who'
took smelling salts when we presented this'
at various points.
Now, I'm going to start to just show you"
some slides about what we were thinking about this.'
Hello.
Go.
There we are.
This is-- you have to forgive me--'
I started photographing on iPhone,'
and I understand just whenever it'
gets blown up, the limits of using it.'
This is Nehru Place in Delhi, and this'
is the Silicon Valley of Delhi.
Beneath the platform over the ground'
here is a parking garage.
The things you see on the side are startup centers--'
little startup centers.
This is a place of lots and lots of different kinds'
of activities happening at the same time.'
Most of these are stolen goods that people are selling here.'
You know, iPhones that dropped off of a truck,'
and things like that--
intermixed with real things like saris and so on.'
So it conforms to a kind of economic model.'
But the most important thing about it to me,'
as an urbanist looking at it, is the porosity'
between the wall and the platform--'
between the enclosed space and the open public space.'
The people working in here, some of them, they shop here.'
Many of the people who are selling stolen goods here,'
are receiving them here.
As an innovation center, Nehru Place'
is stimulating to people because it's not just about innovators"
living together in a bubble, but it's"
part of a very complex city.
This is in the southeast part of Nehru Place.'
The reason we were here is we want to protect'
this place against development.
And every developer in Delhi has their eyes on this.'
You know, get rid of all these people,'
rip down this, and build a high-rise.'
So the open principle here is that there's porosity"
in function and in form, and that the character of the space'
is informal.
Just so you understand that this is not something, as it were,'
Third World.
I hate that word.
Something similar operates in McDougle Street.'
This is stuff going to a lumber yard over here.'
These are yuppie spaces on McDougle Street,'
and above them are old Italian tenements mixed in,'
in this part of McDougle Street, with light manufacturing.'
So in my city, this is a kind of analog,'
and the parts mix in with each other.'
I talked about the relationship of learning'
that an open city takes skill.
And this is a slum in Dharavi.
It's again very mixed.
The reason I show it to you is this.'
Over here is a school.
I don't know if any of you know anything about Indian trains."
But Indian trains are not what we'
think of as the most reliable on time.'
So the kids who live here have got'
to learn a kind of street smarts about getting here,'
and in a very basic way, listening hard'
to the sound of a train that may be there.'
Sometimes, if they can't escape the train,"
they have to learn how to hop onto it.'
The trains are extremely noisy, so the lessons in the school'
are geared to when the train doesn't wipe out"
the voices of the teachers or pupils.'
That's street smarts in an open environment."
And one of the things that impressed me in Medellin--'
where I also worked quite a lot--'
is how sensorily adept kids are in dealing'
with unforeseen or unchanging conditions here.'
Much more so, I would hazard, than kids in a Bourgeois state'
in a city like London or New York.'
They're constantly having to revise"
the knowledge they have of an environment which'
itself is very unstable.
This, unfortunately, has been at times the scene'
of Muslim-Hindu conflict.
And sometimes quite violent.
And the children, again, have to learn how to navigate around--'
there are outbreaks of violence all the time--'
and the children have to learn to navigate'
that kind of social danger, just the way'
they do physical danger.
So that's what I mean by--
and they get better and better at it--'
a rolling kind of dialogical skill.'
This is-- just so you see it in Dharavi--'
is another one of these terrible iPhone photos.'
But what you see here is the mixture'
of, this is a production site, food-selling site.'
People live up here, and they also work up here.'
And this kind of gradation means that the space itself'
is experienced as many things, rather than monofunctional.'
And I should say about monofunctional, spaces,'
that's one of them in the back.
I'm really sorry about my photograph."
It's only a space for residents.
This is funded by the IMF, this project.'
It's housing.
It has flush toilets, et cetera, et cetera.'
It's decayed in about the five or seven years"
since it's been up.
Because, like a monoculture, only one thing happens there.'
People don't really take ownership over it the way"
they do about this space, which they have to make work,'
because it's so complicated.
Whereas this space is just degraded.'
The stairwells are full of shit and piss.'
People don't have a feeling that they belong here in the way"
that they do down here.
OK.
This is a kind of closed city.
Well there's a lot to say about this."
But the these spaces are impermeable, as you can see,'
and they're very repetitive.
And the reason I show you this is that they're"
derivative of this.
This is the most fundamental image of modern planning'
you need to know.
This is a proposal of Corbusier to destroy a complex fabric'
in the Marais, and to replace it by a closed system, which is'
boundaryless and homogeneous.
It's additive in Closed Systems Theory--"
That the whole is not greater than the sum of the parts.'
And Corbusier-- this from 1925, wanted'
to extend it over all the Marais, and indeed'
all of Paris.
The buildings themselves are quite beautiful.'
So this is where I grew up, right here.'
This is Robert Taylor Homes in Chicago.'
It was applied by liberal planning'
as a way of housing mass numbers of people'
in similar structures, which are relationless--'
they are just additive structures.'
And this is another version of the plan Voisin.'
The shelves within the sheaths of all of these skyscrapers'
in Tokyo are exactly the same.
And much of the skyscraper-- this is a photograph'
of my friend Thomas Strood--
you look at it you think this is diversity'
in the urban environment.
In fact, it's exactly the idea of the plan Voisin,"
but disguised.
And this, I would really say, is the enemy of--'
in thinking about an open city-- this'
is the enemy of this, which is this kind of disguised'
homogeneity.
And that was for us a very practical thing.'
I want to go faster.
We did a lot of work on smart cities.'
And here is another aspect of any closed system,'
that there is a tight fit between form and function.'
We looked at this in Masdar.
This is a docking station designed for the Masdar car.'
And this was done by my friend Bill Mitchell,'
and Frank Gehry designed this car.'
Unfortunately, after they worked on this car,'
others came along and improved it.'
Which meant that the cars no longer'
fit in the docking stations, which have been torn down.'
So this is also an issue about open-ended design'
in an open system, which is, that you avoid'
a tight fit for form and function,'
which is always a recipe for technological obsolescence.'
Always.
Now, I'm going to speak to you very quickly"
about what we tried--
Well, just let me say that I'm so long-winded."
You know the fortunes of high tech'
offer a key to understanding how the city is closed.'
High tech has moved from an open to a closed condition.'
Monopoly capitalism, restriction of participation'
in actually the formation of a program's open source, the menu"
rather than the kernel dominates.'
And that's true in cities as well."
There's a loss of synchronicity.
There's kind of standardization.
There's much less local experiment economically,"
and there is an erosion of the powers of municipalities'
at the hands of nation states, which'
is a really big issue in the developing world.'
I'm not going to talk about this because I've talked too much."
So I just wanted to end this presentation by saying,'
what can design do open up the city?'
That was our practical problematic.'
I am not a design determinist.
I don't think that anything you learn in this building"
will change capitalism.
But that's the wrong way to think about it."
that The idea is, what if you could'
get to the economic and political instruments'
to contest Google and Microsoft, what'
would you do in their place?
We were talking about this last week in class.'
If you believe that design is a kind of leading edge'
against capitalism, basically--
well let's not get into it.
Anyhow.
But that's the idea.
What can design do about this?
We singled out three things that you'll"
see in these technical reports.
Edge conditions, incomplete form,'
and arbitrary markings of value, is something'
that design can do.
You know that in the natural world'
there's a distinction on the edge condition,"
between ecological borders and ecological boundaries.'
Very important condition.
An ecological border is something where at the edge'
there is more intense activity between different groups.'
OK.
That's true of the way when the shore hits the land."
That's where organisms feed.
It's where the speed of evolution is strongest."
Species, and so on.
This, which is drawn by one of my students--'
and my favorite image in this whole thing--'
are tiger boundaries drawn in Asia.'
And they represent-- you know how a tiger makes a boundary'
and poops, and it tells you don't go across that."
And these are pretty rigid, and pretty solid'
boundaries between the yellow, and the red, and so on.'
But the notion is that at the boundary there's less activity."
So that's the two edge conditions."
One which the edge intensifies activity,'
which is like a border, and the boundary in which'
the edge condition dispels it.
Now, we're interested in making more borders and less"
boundaries in the city.
And we're inspired by this, not simply by the present day"
conditions, but by the example of Noli's map of Rome."
But if you look at the little things here,'
they're all about permeable public spaces."
That's what all these little markings are."
This is not a figured ground.
This is a much more sophisticated map'
in which Noli really tried to draw what is impermeable'
and what is permeable.
St. Peter's as you know.
And we were interested, were inspired'
by this to look at this.
This is an urban boundary in Caracas.'
We're trying to work at it.
You can see what the boundary is made of.'
It's made of traffic.
The only way to cross from here to here is this one bridge.'
Maids cross from here to clean these houses.'
Nobody from this middle class thing crosses in to the barrio.'
This was done under the sainted socialist regime of Venezuela.'
This one.
This is ubiquitous throughout the emerging cities.'
OK.
The second thing we were interested in'
was incomplete form.
You all know Aravena's Iquique, which is a form made incomplete"
in order to be filled in.
The before and after.
And the idea of this--
which is rather persuasive, although I don't like"
the actual architecture of it--
The idea of persuasiveness is it's better"
to make half of a good house, than to make a complete cruddy'
house.
So these are economic and very good houses.'
I adore him, but I have so many problems about this.'
Anyhow.
But that's the result. It's sweat equity, and it works."
We were interested in a different condition, which'
is incomplete form as something that's found in the city,"
rather than made from the start.
And the reason for that is something'
that you may not know if you don't know Third World cities."
The spread in them is not built just'
on empty agricultural land.
There are abandoned spaces that are filled in for housing.'
There are places which, as we see a lot in China,'
in which there are disused things--'
like factories and so on--
which could be recolonized.
And the idea that the development'
occurs on a kind of blank slate is really wrong.'
A lot of development occurs through colonizing'
forms that were incomplete.
I worked on this project.
This has been always a guide to me.'
This is the Riverside Viaduct at 125th street in New York.'
Do you know it?
Well, the West Side Highway is above it,'
and this was originally just left in the [? moses ?] era,'
this was just left below this.
This is the west edge of Harlem.
And we put the first fairway supermarket.'
We just inserted below the highway.'
It was the first time that blacks and whites'
had a supermarket in West Harlem, and they met there.'
And it was the kind of racial co-presence'
which fit into the kind of social relations'
I've been describing to you.
But the point about this is everywhere'
in cities there are places like this,'
which are spaces which are incomplete forms which'
are found.
And our argument in Habitat III is'
that these are the spaces we want to develop.'
We want to do this kind of stuff,'
rather than draw on blank sheets of paper.'
And that's a big issue, I would say,"
for people doing elements here.
The tendency is always to treat the city'
as a kind of tabula rasa, which loses out exactly'
on the possibilities for doing this kind of stuff.'
The third thing we did is we were'
very interested in the ways of arbitrarily marking'
spatial value--
to make a value where nobody saw value in space.'
The prototype for this, the classic way to do it,'
is the Piazza del Popolo, and Sixtus V.'
You use this obelisk as a way of saying, come here,'
this is not just an empty space at the end of a bunch of roads,'
it has a value.
The issue for us was the relation'
between context and non-context in ways of marking space.'
This is a very context-specific marker.'
The frame here determines the form'
of these markers, which mark this is a place of importance.'
We were much more interested in this--'
in the use of arbitrary markers to make value'
where there is no value.
This young boy is tending--
this is in Medellin, where I work a lot, as I said.'
It's just he bought a plant and he planted it."
And it's a way of marking that space as something other than--"
it's blasted out because there's been a lot of drug violence"
there.
I'm just saying, this is habitable."
And what we have been thinking about is ways of doing this.'
I'm going to show you the design issue of this."
This, in Berlin, is a context specific intervention'
of a bench.
It can only be there because of the steps.'
Where this is an arbitrary imposition.'
These benches are imposed to one of the most'
degraded streets in East Berlin, and they make value.'
One of the things that we have been thinking about in the work'
we have been doing, particularly in working'
with decayed environments, is how'
to create a system of these arbitrary markers that'
mark that this place matters to someone.'
These people have never seen a bench.'
I don't know if any of you know, parts of East Berlin"
are disgusting.
They are decaying.
People on the street.
You can see all of this.
But these very simple kind of interventions'
are creating value for people.
And I have to say, it's part and parcel of an analytic level"
of what happens in an open system,'
that there are what are called arbitrary intrusions which'
change the path of development.
That's where you get task dependency"
through what are called arbitrary intrusions.'
If you use the Linux system--
I can barely program it-- but if you're"
good at programming in it, you can introduce these'
all the time.
This is the urban analog to changing'
the path of what something looks like through an arbitrary'
thing.
So this has translated.
We're spending a lot more money in both the IMF and World Bank,"
on these things that are looked at as gewgaws instead'
of buildings, on street furniture,'
on landscaping, on things that arbitrarily'
raise the value of places.
So I hope this gives you an idea of what I've been up to."
As I say, I don't think I'll live to Habitat IV."
Maybe I'll make to 90, I don't know."
I doubt it.
But for us, these aren't all that we're thinking about."
But these give you an eye flavor working'
to open up edges as borders, to work with incomplete forms'
as found opportunities, and to impose arbitrarily'
value of transforming the city by design into an open system.'
So that's what I have to say.
[applause]
[interposing voices]
Yeah, fine.
Open up for questions.
Tell me where we went wrong.
It's only 20 years of work, so.
Well, I'll start with a question."
Yeah?
While you guys are getting your questions together.'
So I actually have two maybe related questions.'
First of all, thank you very much.'
I always love hearing you draw on your great urban'
sociological [inaudible]
Whatever.
--trying to understand how people interact in spaces.'
Your implicit, if not explicit, critique of modernism,'
in thinking about the open city.
So I guess, my first question has to do with--'
I mean, the general question is, how would you'
get citizens and the state--
and we can talk about the local state now,'
not even the national government--'
you made a point about the left and the national state--'
to value the open city that you are producing.'
Because I can see, in a roomful of designers, how we love what'
you're talking about.
And the serendipity, and the beauty of mixed use,'
and spontaneity, and serendipity-- things you've"
all written about.
But as somebody who works in the developing world,'
you can imagine a conversation with bureaucratic officials--'
and even some middle-class citizens-- who do not'
appreciate the romanticization of informality,'
for example, that you've shown of Mumbai."
And that we may hate Corbusier and these big high-rises,'
but a lot of people want to live there,'
and a lot of real estate developers'
want to build those things, and a lot of local governments'
are looking for mass-produced housing for their citizens.'
So just let me add that I'm working with students here."
I've done some work in Mexico.
We're in a city in [inaudible],, I hope some of you are here."
Oh, really?
But you get citizens that want to have single-family homes out'
in the middle of nowhere.
They don't want to be interacting"
in places that look like Mumbai and Dharavi, et cetera.'
So how do we take these wonderful ideas'
that you're talking about, that we as designers and planners"
might be thinking about, and how do we promote and change'
the way people have come to think about cities now?'
Well, that's a wonderful question."
One of the volumes in the report of Habitat III'
is about co-production.
And our answer to getting people involved in working this way,'
is by a whole set-- and it's in my new book."
It's so cheap and it'll come out April 11th you guys."
It has a lot about co-production as a way of involving people'
in the process of wanting to make places more open rather'
than closed.
I'm going to just give you one example of this"
that we've been working on.
Co-production is not the same as consultation.'
Consultation is an expert getting up and saying,'
this is what you should do.
Isn't it beautiful?
And the people say, no, that's not what I want."
We've worked with all sorts of techniques"
where skilled designers like me and ordinary citizens,'
work on actually generating alternative forms'
for a particular project.
Some of it may seem trivial to you.'
The use of big-scaled Styrofoam blocks,'
which people can move around and experiment with,'
is really involving to people.
We've got a whole set of techniques."
We've made catalogs of parts that would"
put Rem Koolhaas to shame.
That people sort of flip through there.'
Their coffee table objects, and Rio, and so on.'
But the point about this-- my experience with this'
is that the more you involve expert and citizens together'
from the beginning in co-production,'
the more people are open to being open,'
and the less what they want to do'
is build a gated-community, because they're"
involved in the design process from the beginning.'
The one limit on all of this--
and again this is just my own experience'
in working with poor communities--'
at a certain point the expert disappears.'
If you make three or four--
just the same thing we do in the GSD--'
you make three or four alternatives of a project,'
people can look at it.
They understand the pluses and minuses of each.'
And then the so-called experts says goodbye and the people'
themselves have to decide what they want to do.'
When I worked in Beirut in the mid and late '90s"
on reconstruction of a part of Beirut,'
with that horrible terrorist Hezbollah.'
Let's not go there.
And between Hezbollah and a lot of the phalanges,'
parts of South Beirut were a mess.'
But if you laid out to people three or four ways--'
worked with them-- ways of even using a scarce resource'
like copper wire.
And you've got to decide.
In conditions like that, people say well they're gone."
I claimed my mother had gotten ill, or something like that.'
I had some excuse.
And these two groups--
they hated each other, but they worked together'
to come to a decision.
But much more broadly, I just think'
that the answer to opening the city it's"
more democracy of design.
Not a better design.
Do you understand what I'm saying?"
It's not the right design that involves people in the city."
It's the notion that they made whatever is there."
Even if it's so simple as distributing copper"
tubing for plumbing.
So you're calling for a participatory design,"
which I think we're trying to do more here."
I'm not going to start a dialogue here."
And I totally agree with you.
But then we start thinking about,'
what are the institutions that are'
available to us to suggest--
and the scale at which that happens.'
I guess I'm agreeing with you in saying"
that we need to be working more on'
not just being compelled by the idea,'
but how do we implement it in practice.'
This is a part of the dilemma that we're constantly"
facing in planning and design, which'
is how you get the designers to take processes and repertoires'
of action that are in planning?
It's not just that we can't agree that that's important,"
but then how do you change larger planning institutions'
at the scale of a city to engage participatory design.'
Breakdown, yeah.
We should have some questions here though.'
Hi.
Thank you for your wonderful talk.'
I had the opportunity to work with one of the communities'
that you chose.
Oh, great.
Which one?
Caracas.
It was the barrio.
It was the informal settlements.
Oh, Caracas.
And in a process of participatory design,'
at that opportunity I had read your theory'
about borders and boundaries.
I really wanted to improve more connection'
between different communities.
Because, as you know, these informal settlements'
is not only one community.
Yeah, it is many.
Is the sum of many smaller communities.'
But at the same time, they live the good experience'
of interaction, the community suffer the problems'
of lack of rules, of norms, to work together,'
to live together.
So in that opportunity I proposed many options.'
And the community to choose the ones that promote an enclaves.'
That's just the way it should be."
They walled in the community, because they'
want to protect themselves from the violence'
of the environment.
So how can we deal if we know of technicians, that committee'
is choosing what we think is not a good option for them?'
Well, in that community--
that's a very drug--
Am I remembering that right?
No, it's not.
I think that's something about talk."
That's where this dialogical thing comes in."
The more you can get people to talk with each other--'
but that's just my own experience with it."
If you say, what do you want to people,'
they'll say safety, protection, lock the doors, and so on."
If you get people from different communities talk to each other,'
the process can open up.
And oftentimes talk is not goal-oriented.'
That's where the informality of this comes in."
This is not a magic bullet--
open city.
I said that in the beginning.
I just emphasize that.
But it is a way of thinking about how you want to guide'
the kind of action you have.
If you don't want people to close up,"
you have to get them to interact in ways where they're not"
focused on the other as a threat.'
Do you know what it mean?
And that's dialogical.
It's non-aggressive, non-assertive ways of thinking."
As I remember, that's from villages all over Venezuela,"
isn't it, that barrio?
[inaudible]
Yeah.
Anyhow.
Hello.
Over here.
I don't see you.
Raise your hand.
Down on the first row.
Oh, there you are.
Yes.
Thanks for your lecture.
I was wondering.
You mentioned how design can't change capitalism,"
but I'm wondering how design can dismantle it, or transform it."
Isn't that the same thing?
Well, no.
Because it is saying, we're not changing"
the principles of capitalism.
We're not changing how it works.
We're actually just using a different system."
You could do that, but it would be on a very small scale.'
I'm giving you serious answer to this."
I think the notion that you create'
a protected realm where you're working"
with a different set of assumptions, can be valuable.'
But you're never going to achieve scale that way."
Politics requires politics.
I don't think design, for instance--"
if I wanted to stop gentrification in New York,'
I know exactly what I do.
I'd Institute commercial rent controls."
It would work a treat.
But it has nothing to do with what any of those stores'
look like.
It's economic power, against economic power."
And I just think for you, as a designer,'
if you think, how can I avoid this system by making a better'
design?
It's too small, and it's too, in a way, unreal."
I mean, what we do as designers it's very partial,"
it's very important.
It's very important to think what should be."
But the power of what should be is limited.'
You understand the point I'm making."
You've got to fight capitalism with socialism."
Period.
You're not going to fight it with lowering the building"
heights.
Do you know what I mean?
There is a kind of way in which you'
have to enter into the adult world of dirty power,'
and recognize that you're partially"
going to be imprisoned by that, and demeaned by it.'
But not simply to think that, oh, it's"
useless to do anything by that.
Now, I don't know.
I suffered this all my life.
I'm a good socialist.
But it's in a somewhat different compartment from me,"
from my eye
[inaudible] -- the way that we design involves the economic'
systems and the political systems in place.'
So inherently, all design is political in that way.'
Absolutely.
So I guess I'm wondering like--
What I'm talking about is the power of what you make."
You can get a vision of something that's different."
But as I say, the vision of something that's different"
is not going to be empowering in a way'
that political or economic activity is empowering.'
This is just my own view of this.'
And I'll tell you why I feel this."
Because so often-- it's a discussion I had with Jane"
Jacobs all the time--
so often we were fighting power and we lose, we give up,'
because the things we want to build are just overwhelmed.'
And just to say about her--
I mean the thing about Jane is, after she'
wrote Economy of Cities, she sort'
of lost interest in design.
Because she saw it wasn't going to change--"
She could resist Robert Moses, but she couldn't erase him."
And she became uninterested in urbanism.'
She had wonderful, wonderful writings,'
but it was a kind of defeatism.
I don't think that's the trajectory you want to go in."
Can I get in here for a second?
And then we have somebody here had a hand up also--'
We have one up in the balcony, too.'
OK.
Yeah, great.
OK.
I just want to respond to this exchange a little bit.'
And maybe add what I thought you were going to say,'
Richard, about the issue about design and capitalism.'
I'm going to sit for--
In total agreement that the building heights and how you--'
thinking in a very narrow sense of physical design,'
obviously, is not going to dismantle capitalism.'
But that doesn't necessarily mean"
that one has to say that all design reinforces capitalism,'
right?
And I think what's missing in that conversation is"
the focus on the fact that to dismantle capitalism is'
a social and political project, as Richard has said-- social'
as well as a political project, which'
means people have to be involved and they have to mobilize'
and they have to do the work of fighting against capitalism.'
And this is where I think the design comes in.'
It's quite consistent of what you"
were saying about open cities.
How do you create cities that bring people together'
to mobilize?
So there is a design dimension to it.'
But there's not a direct relationship with design"
and the dismantling of capitalism.'
Is how did design create the urban conditions,'
the solidarity, the sense of values,'
the conversation, the normative project,'
that would be necessary in order to fight against capitalism so'
I don't think get out of the picture completely,"
but it's really important not just to any direct relationship"
between design and support for or dismantling of capitalism.'
I couldn't have said it better myself."
Should I go?
OK.
Hi, thank you here.
First I want to say, I am actually from Beijing.'
And it's actually quite sad every time people mention"
about a Chinese city, they always'
show those pictures of high-rise, gated, tower'
community.
Where I actually want to say, I think, in Chinese culture,'
if you look at the ground level, sometimes you built very--'
as you would put it-- very enclosed closed urban space.'
But people somehow always try to find a way'
to permeate that closed structure,'
and then figure out a way to--
on the ground level-- to interact with each other.'
And as you were showing all these wonderful examples,'
I was just wondering, out of all these countries'
you've worked with, do you find this idea"
of creating a more open city a universal concept'
that should be adopted by every culture?'
Or is there some exceptions that you've met, where people do not"
want this kind of open space?
And as planners, I guess it's also"
should we prioritize this as our idea of planning?'
Or should we-- sometimes there are'
ideas that we always promote, like DOT and Shared Bike,'
and all that.
But sometimes that's not the community's top priority."
Right?
It's like these little wonderful designs on a street level"
to create a more open space.
How much should we as planners prioritize these?'
Well, you made a comment and asked me a question.'
The comment, is you're absolutely right."
I mean, those buildings can be used'
by people who want to have life on the ground.'
UNDP is involved in trying to salve as many of the hutong'
structures in Beijing as we can--'
also the shikomen in Shanghai--
as structures as places for people'
to practice that kind of life.
I'd say it's just harder when you're dealing"
with a 46-story building.
It's just harder to hold on to.
The question you asked me, I'm going"
to answer in a way which may seem outrageous.'
I think you should universalize every value you have.'
I don't think you should be culture-specific."
Let people argue with you and say,'
but that doesn't work here.
We don't want that.
Don't be nice.
Oh, I understand your way of life.'
You want to live in a gated-community,'
and never see a black person.
I understand.
You're southern American.
I sympathize.
No.
Not at all.
And I think part of the whole job of planning is to say,'
this is what you should want.
Argue with people.
Be dialogical with them rather than substitute empathy'
for will.
That's my own view of this.
And I have to say, I mean, I'm as a nice guy,"
but I practice what I preach.
When you say to people, you're all wrong."
You want the wrong things.
They take that more seriously than if you say, oh, God,'
poor you.
This is true.
It's an experience in this country"
with white, working class, people for instance.'
If you go, oh, they're such victims."
They're suffering.
I understand why they voted for Trump.'
No.
No, the answer is to say, you did something wrong.'
And that is a way of taking the other person seriously'
as a person.
So I just don't buy this notion of communal sensitivity."
I don't buy it at all.
I think you should be a provocateur.'
Well, it's really terrific to hear somebody actually"
say something firm.
So I was formulating a moment ago a rather rough question.'
But I wanted to precedent it with a rather sentimental'
anecdote, which is, the 125th Street exit off'
of the West Hudson Parkway.
Every time I come in to New York to visit a friend of mine'
in Harlem, that Safeway is an amazing indicator'
that I am now in a city.
Oh, my boy!
[laughs]
So very, very happy to see it.
So now for the more difficult question.'
You obliquely actually-- or actually'
even directly confronted this-- but'
that the procedures and processes of designs, I think,'
work in so far as the powerbrokers,'
more specifically, the actors that'
have agency in this situation, really'
even want to entertain the conversation.'
And I think that in a neighborhood like Caracas,'
you have this density and overlaying of people,'
that you almost kind of have a milieu where you can at least'
have publicity of your cause.
But in, let's say, these white working class neighborhoods"
in the United States-- or I'd say, more specifically,"
in the underserved neighborhoods of the caricatured inner cities'
of the United States, the powerbrokers who'
would have the ability to reshape and provide'
the services, or to provide the resources to enable'
those communities, are absent, disengaged,'
and absolutely not looking to entertain big city liberal'
coming in to save the day.
So I'm absolutely with you on the design strategy front."
And I'm absolutely with you on the argument"
that politics is the situation.
But how do you actually engage to make audience'
the issues of what you're describing,"
especially contextual to the United States I think?'
Well, that's a really good question."
I'll just give you a couple answers I've found about this."
One of the things that I've recommended"
when I've done community organizing,"
is that people not go to community consultations,'
that they don't play the game of listening to somebody"
tell them what's going to be done for them."
And this is a strategy not unique to me--'
it comes from Saul Alinsky--
about the notion of what power needs is an audience.'
And if their audience is absent, there's"
a lot of delegitimization.
That goes on.
So when we were working in Chicago on Cabrini-Green,'
the notion was that we boycotted the official workings of this.'
You need somebody from the outside'
who is going to be an alternative source of power'
often.
And working with emerging cities, that's a role that UNDP"
and now UN-Habitat are trying play.'
They are, as it were, at the local level--'
that alternative to voice to this articulation of power.'
It's a really complicated issue for us,"
because the UN is caught in all these cross currents.'
But what I know about this is that the way to start with this'
is by delegitimating the settings'
and institutions in which power gets itself ratified.'
And that means a totally different relationship'
to a thing like planning boards.
When we were working on Dharavi, we'
were encouraging people to vote en [? blanco. ?] You'
know that is?
To turn in blank ballots to say that the process is not'
legitimate.
It's a whole different set of tools."
Is it successful?
Sometimes.
And sometimes it isn't.
But it is at least understanding that the point of this'
is to start by delegitimating the process by which power'
ratifiers itself through all these planning instruments.'
And do you all know the name of Saul Alinsky?'
Is somebody familiar to you all?
[inaudible]
Citizens Action program.
Back of the Yards program.
He was once here, by the way, and stayed for 20 minutes.'
And just said, it's not worth it."
Well, that's the old GSD.
That's the old GSD.
Absolutely.
We have one more--
Yeah, we have one more question, and then I--'
Yeah.
Thank you.
I wanted to extend a little bit the point'
that Diane brought up, about institutions who could champion'
and advocate for the things you're talking about--"
the exchange, the serendipity, the unplanned encounter,'
and good things that happen in open urban environments.'
If we think about the actual practice of real estate'
development, urban design, and architecture,'
then the owners of properties behind private property lines'
have very clear motives to--
whether it's profit-driven motives of other"
self-interested motives--
in championing their cause.
The public space, on the other hand,'
is generally owned by the public or by the municipality.'
I should be, yeah.
It should be.
Right.
And they oftentimes don't have the same level"
of advocacy or interest in advocating'
for the things you talk about.
And if you simply think to look into,'
for instance, urban design practice,'
all urban designers know that there's"
very little money in urban design--'
all the money is in the buildings.'
After doing the urban design, the hope to get'
commissioned a few buildings out of it to pay the bill that went'
[inaudible].
So I guess my question is, have you encountered, or do you'
have institutions and cities as examples, where that has been'
managed and figured out in better ways, in which you can'
really put resources behind the management'
and design of public space in a very serious way to champion'
the values you're talking about.
Examples like-- just what comes to mind,'
for instance, Vienna has a planning department composed'
of 300 people for the size of Vienna,'
and it does a really great work.
But what sort of examples--
I'll give you one example that we're working--"
the mayor of Bogota, Enrique Penalosa--'
has he ever spoken here?
Yeah, he has.
He's also part of this scientific community."
He has pointed out that the greatest privatization'
of public space is parking, and the strategies'
in his paper for taking back the public and public space'
is largely to shrink streets and eliminate street parking.'
Very banal in a way.
But also very, very profound, which is the notion that we'
have to-- and I am convinced by him on this--'
rethink the notion of motion in the city'
in order to take back this public space.'
And that goes back in the history of urbanism to'
[? hausmann, ?] who was against parking,'
and what happened with the automobile, and so on.'
The larger question-- and that is an example of trying.'
He's trying to do it.
And he's been very successful in Bogota, his first two"
times around as mayor, and in recapturing public space.'
There is another issue--
we just don't have time to talk about it--"
which is that there are two ways in which people invest.'
Foreign investors invest in cities at a distance.'
One is opportunity investing, where'
you're focused on a missed opportunity,"
or lack of money to develop a particular site.'
And the other is core of investing,'
which is where you're basically buying specifications."
Materials and so on.
And then you're building a building"
to suit in some place it's completely non context"
dependent.
And what's happening in the economy of a lot of developing"
cities, is there is this shift from opportunity investing--'
which requires local knowledge-- to core investing,'
in which the process of development'
is like a voluntary exchange based on specs.'
So one of our recommendations is that core investors, if they're"
going to do that, be required to see'
a building through to its actual completion.'
Because a lot of core investing then flips.'
I buy a project, then I sell it on to somebody,'
or sell a right.
Something like that.
That's a way of at least holding private capital"
responsible for delivering something.'
It's minimal.
But it is a halfway step.
And some countries will do this.
I think Great Britain is actually'
going to do this, in which you hold'
an investor responsible to the public for actually trying'
to make a profit out of a public good, which is land.'
Anyhow, this has been an incredibly long discussion.'
Thank you for being so patient.
And before you end tonight.
Before we give you a huge round of applause to you.'
Because I am so happy, you gave this lecture, Richard,'
because this is a very rich conversation that I hope'
we can continue-- is this on?
No.
No.
--that we can continue here at the school.'
But I just want to pull up some summary points,'
and then we're going to have a huge round of applause for you."
One, again, just picking up on your last comment.'
I just think that--
this is a super self-serving comment,'
but I just think that what we're starting to talk about here,"
is the way in which design and planning are all'
about politics and power.
And how do you make decisions about how do you engage'
with that larger project?
It's so easy to think about the discipline of planning,"
the discipline of urban design is if they float around.'
They float around.
And that it's really about if you"
want to change the physical and social world in which we live'
in, for other objectives, it's really"
about engaging those institutions'
and being strategic in those arrangements.'
The second comment that I'd like to pull up, that I think"
came through in your answers to multiple questions,'
and I'm actually even thinking about the fellow upstairs"
with like the United States.
I think that one thing that I learned being in the planning'
side of our department from urban designers,'
is the importance of thinking strategically'
about where to intervene.
And you brought it up with the kind of liminal space'
that you're looking at.
But we could take that framework,'
not just in different places, to be exploring and discovering'
different places in a neighborhood, or in a city,'
for intervention.
That might have the greatest capacity to kind of shake up'
things.
But we should be thinking about cities that way.'
In particular, we as students here,'
should be honing our analytical skills'
to understand the character and the nature,'
physical and social, of different types of cities.'
Large cities versus small cities.'
Southern cities of Trump voters versus New York City.'
And that in some ways you can be strategic about intervening'
in those places, in creating projects in those places,'
that will change the social conversation.'
And that's what's going to work up."
We tend to focus our attention, maybe,'
on the skills that we're getting-- the design"
skills and the planning skills.
Process and building design.
But we're not thinking about the places"
that we should be applying those projects more.'
If you care about changing politics, or dismantling'
capitalism, that's the analytic you need."
Not just the skill set itself.
And I guess it's a call out for focusing more"
on the specificity of places.
Knowing the deep culture, history,'
institutions of places, many different places,'
and then being strategic about where'
you want to apply your skills.
Rather than just always-- everybody's always"
working in New York City.
Everybody's always working in the places that"
are most close to the project that we're trying to achieve,"
as opposed to going to the tough places'
to be urban planners and designers.'
And I just think all that came through in both in your talk,'
and in the engagement with the students.'
So thank you so much, Richard.
Well, thank you for asking me.
[applause]
