Good evening.
Thank you so much everyone for coming out.'
We're actually very excited about the exhibition"
and about this opening tonight.
And maybe even a little nervous.
I'm Michael Hays if there are visitors here"
and don't know that.
I'm joined by Andrew Holder.
We co-curated the exhibition outside,'
and we'll try to go some way toward explaining it tonight."
I really do think if we can come across and get some'
of this explanation, you'll see that the show is actually"
quite a lot of fun and merits a lot meditation, and study,'
and returning to.
We hope tonight, which is really just the opening'
of the exhibition, will not come off like a formal presentation.'
We really want this to be a conversation.'
I think we're going to try very hard to leave"
enough time for a conversation with the audience.'
Questions, answers, comments.
Because one of the things that we've tried to do in the school"
lately very much is to have a public discourse that'
continues in the hallways, in the studios,'
as well as in the classrooms.
And we very much see this exhibition'
as part of providing material that'
helps establish that discourse.
We hope that through gallery talks,'
maybe with some of the faculty, we can actually'
use it to continue those.
But first, we owe a lot of thanks I'll ask Andrew to give."
Yes.
Michael and I are deeply indebted,'
and there are a couple of people that we would'
like to acknowledge publicly.
So first and foremost, our sort of dual patrons, MOS and Pat.'
Thank you for your support of the exhibition'
and for your leadership.
And please forgive us when the bill arrives.'
[laughter]
We would also like to add to our list of patrons.'
Both Ken and Paige in the communications office'
have been indispensable.
And, of course, also Dan Borelli and David Zimmerman-Stuart,'
who lead the exhibitions team.
And they wrought miracles along with their team of installers'
and did some really brilliant work.'
So our heartfelt thanks.
There were a great number of students'
involved in the production of the show,'
perhaps too many to call out singly.'
But I would like to identify three in particular from three'
different programs here at the GSD.'
First, Mindy Hsu, who is a current MDes'
student who is absolutely instrumental to the exhibition'
design.
Christina Shivers, a doctoral candidate,'
helped to orchestrate all of the logistics of getting this work'
here, which was no small task.
Adam Strobel, who is an MArch student.'
And we'll just call him our tireless jack of all trades."
He sort of had his fingers in everything and did brilliantly.'
With those thanks, we should also'
emphasize the kind of enormity of the task.'
So there are more than 70 practices'
on display in the hallway outside,'
many of them originating here at the GSD.'
We have nearly 400 drawings and images and 26-ish models'
if one of them made it through customs this afternoon.'
And all of that was brought together'
in a span of about 45 days by this team.'
So once again, thank you.
"It need scarcely be said that an epitaph presupposes'
a monument upon which it is to be engraved."'
This is the opening sentence of Wordsworth's longest"
critical text which is part prose, part poetry,'
but it's actually made to be a kind of theoretical text called"
Essays Upon Epitaphs.
This is 1810.
When you come in and see the main introductory wall text,'
this is the first thing that appears.'
And for us, it's an inaugural case"
of the concept of inscription, which'
I want to unpack a little bit.
Notice that the word monument, which is, of course,'
for us architecture of a certain sort,'
it has a flatly literal meaning.
It's devoid of any attribution of value."
This is not the great monument full of content and grandeur'
that is great because of its meaning or its content.'
It's rather a fairly inert material object"
that provides a surface for marking, for the epitaph.'
It does not have any meaning in it.'
Now this, of course, is a departure'
for an object of art, whose artistic nature would usually'
be thought of as a function of its form being transformed'
into some clear representational content.'
And it's that departure that interests us."
At the same time, Wordsworth makes monument'
mean the material element, the sort of culturally'
shared reading apparatus that the epitaph presupposes.'
This culturally shared reading apparatus'
has to already be in place if the epitaph, if the speech,'
the text is going to have any effect.'
The monument is a prior condition for a text to come.'
This restrictive use of the word monument'
is actually really important for us.'
It marks an attention, first of all,'
to a culturally specific medium and yet, the medium'
is not semantic.
It's blank.
It doesn't have imminent meaning."
It is attention to an expression yet to come.'
But at the same time, it insist that the material will'
impinge upon that expression.
The epitaph itself, the mark, cannot exist without'
the architecture.
And it's for this reason partly--"
So the use of the word presuppose'
that means this precondition that already exists, perhaps'
like in a virtual dimension.
Architecture seems to be already there'
before the epitaph speaks.
And it's for partially this reason"
that the subtitle Architecture Before'
Speech that we use for the show, for the exhibition,'
came partially from this Wordsworth quotation.'
So what we're going to do tonight"
is to try to make sense of this notion of inscription,'
but do it by mapping on this kind of definition'
onto the four categories in the entire field of the exhibition.'
And we're going to do this by sort of going back"
and forth a couple of times.
I'll first comment a little further on the background"
of the concept of inscription, then'
Andrew will talk about the field of work that we draw from.'
And I just want to point out it's extremely important for us"
that a lot of this work comes from the faculty'
of the Graduate School of Design because--'
and this is just for the family--'
let's say part of our claim is that not only are"
we part of this larger discourse,'
but we're actually an important driving part of it."
And it's important for us that that's the case."
So Andrew will talk about that feel.'
And then I'll come back and focus--"
you'll see a couple of diagrams out there."
One is a very important quadripartite diagram'
where we try to show the relationship, or signal'
relationship, between the four categories.'
And our claim is going to be that these four categories are'
not arbitrary.
They're actually logically related."
And that's what I'll try to explain."
And then Andrew will come back finally'
to talk about the effects and affects'
that are sponsored by the works.
I think we're going to interrupt each other."
I think we would like to have those interruptions be'
productive and lead to a more informal conversation'
that we'd like to continue.
So I'll get on with that so we have time."
The intellectual ethos of the work'
that we're presenting in the exhibition we want to suggest"
actually derives from the profound cultural shifts'
not in the 1990s, but in the mid to late 1960s.'
And we're not claiming that there's any direct relationship"
between the work and the ethos that I'
want to show the background of, but rather'
that the architecture that did evolve from this discourse'
went a different direction.
And now what we see is an architecture'
returning, not intentionally, but returning nevertheless,'
to a discourse that started in the '60s."
There are two discourses.
One is the architectural discourse itself,'
which I'm actually not going to talk about,"
but it would involve people as diverse as Archizoom,'
early, early OMA, and Ungers, Venturi, and Ghery, Rossi.'
It would involve those kinds of people.'
And Eisenman.
And Eisenman.
For sure.
For sure.
We'll do that in a class.
But the other that I do want to talk about'
because I think it's less familiar, is"
the shift from structuralist thought--'
Levi Strauss and others--
which was largely descriptive and synchronic,'
to post-structuralist thought, which was historical.'
And it's that historicity, that attention to historical,"
that will be important for us.
But actually I'm going to demonstrate both discourses"
in a single example.
And it starts with Tony Smith, who in 1966 recounted'
the dark night in 1951 when Smith found himself'
in a car with three students from Cooper Union,'
driving illegally down the not yet opened New Jersey Turnpike.'
He talks about there were no street lamps,'
there were no lane markers or guardrails.'
So this photograph I'm using is actually taken later."
They relied on their headlights, but also he'
says on the industrial glow of the landscape of North Jersey.'
And in a now famous Artforum form interview in '66,"
he described the drive as a revelation about art.'
He says, "The road and much of the landscape was artificial,'
and yet it couldn\'t be called a work of art."'
And it's interesting this word artificial."
Artifice will also become an important concept for us.'
"On the other hand," he said, "it did something for me'
that art had never done.
It seemed that there had been a reality there that had not'
had any expression in art.
The experience of the road was something mapped out'
but not socially recognized.
And I thought to myself, it ought to be clear'
that that's the end of art.
Painting looks pretty pictorial after that.'
There\'s no way to frame it--"
And I'm suggesting he's saying there's no way"
to frame that landscape like you frame a painting,'
but there's also no way to frame it"
given the conventional concepts of art.'
There's no way to conceptually frame it."
You just have to experience it.
This is actually already a theory of inscription,'
though he doesn't use the word.
A year later Derrida would publish--'
actually the collected essays he publishes it--'
so probably it was written at the same time'
Smith was writing this.
Derrida would for the first time use the word inscription'
theoretically.
The context is Derrida is quoting Antonin Artuad's"
description of a painful experience'
that he always has in creative writing, This'
moment where you feel like you're"
entirely trained, and prepared, and experienced.'
He's at the top of his career, but he has nothing to say."
This combination of high level of skill and drawing'
a blank Derrida says actually should'
be understood as the very condition from which'
all artistic expression comes.
It's not an anomaly.
This is Derrida.
"The thought of the thing as what it is already merges'
with--" actually the reading becomes confused with'
"--the experience of pure speech."'
Now pure speech, pure word, is a code word for Derrida.'
It just means the assumption that'
some unadulterated extreme level of speech'
is the beginning of any expression.'
He says, "When we try to think reality--",'
or what Smith calls reality, it first'
gets confused with the experience of pure speech,'
or just with experience itself.
And then he says, but doesn't pure"
speech, which he should have in quotations,'
as if there could be such a thing, pure potential,'
doesn't it require inscription?
Something in the manner of the way essence'
requires existence, and thereby pushes on towards the world.'
In other words essence, to think of the thing'
as it already is, to think of its essence,'
requires existence, materialization.'
And only through that materialization,'
which he here calls inscription, can existence act on the world.'
Or sorry, potential then can act on the world.'
Now up here what Smith calls reality,'
Derrida is calling the thing as it is.'
Thought about reality merges with the experience'
of pure speech, which is an extreme case,'
but which really means pure potential, pure possibility.'
That kind of pure possibility.
The experience of this pure potential,'
which Smith says has never been expressed in art, which'
the road now conveys, has been mapped out,'
Smith says, but not socially recognized.'
It's materially there.
It's been inscribed, mapped out, but it's not"
yet socially coded.
It's blank.
It's there materially, but it's not there semantically."
But it's already mapped.
According to Derrida, that materialization'
has to happen before coding.
Coding is not first.
Semantic is not first.
First, it has to be pure material.'
And that's what the turnpike is.
Inscription is potential pushing toward action, Derrida says.'
And note, that this pushing on is not a neutral force.'
It is a specific force, or a vector.'
And in Smith's case, that specificity, that vector,"
is completely embedded in the road and the landscape, which'
is to say architecture.
So inscription here-- and the important point is that'
in theory and in practice--
inscription is the point of articulation'
between pure potential and expression.'
Between force and form.
It does not have to do with sign, meaning,'
function, but rather potential.
And then just to conclude this first part,'
I just wanted to remind you that this intellectual field is'
actually quite known.
It's just never until now been brought"
into architectural practice, which is what we're saying"
happens.
Roland Barthes didn't use the word."
So this is where the quotation from Derrida'
was published, in a collection of essays.'
Roland Barthes never used the word inscription,'
but he used the word scriptable, scriptable, a French neologism'
as it is in English.
But he compares the scriptable text to the readable text.'
The readable text is a text of pleasure, purely consumable.'
It's easy.
It's lazy.
It's the novel that you read to go to sleep by."
That's the readable text.
The scriptable text actually disrupts'
novelistic expectations.
It must be constantly performed.
It must be constantly interpreted.'
Every time you read it again and again, you have to re-enact it.'
And it will be different.
Because he says reading a scriptable text'
is like writing a text yourself.
And it's associated not with pleasure, but with jouissance,"
which we will come back to.
A pleasure that is more like a bliss,'
but a bliss almost painful and disruptive of expectations.'
Paul de Man on the other hand, writing in English'
for most of his intellectual career,'
distinguished between what he called phenomentality,'
which is actual experience of certain concrete things,'
and what he called the materiality of inscription,'
which he says has to be prior to phenomenon.'
He and Derrida are very, very close.'
The Wordsworth example I actually got from Paul de Man.'
He talks about that the scratches'
on the surface of the stone can be perceived as phenomenon.'
You can experience them in a concrete way, but to the extent'
that they can be read, there has to be this sedimentation'
of cultural history.
There has to be the cultural apparatus of reading itself'
which is already in place.
That's what the epitaph presupposes,"
that that apparatus will be there when the person comes'
and performs the reading.
So again, architecture preceding speech.'
So just a note to the both of us, Michael.'
At some point I would like to return'
to this idea of the road not taken out of the '60s that's"
happening again now.
So if Michael gave you a kind of overview'
of the intellectual genesis of our curatorial effort,'
I would like to give you a kind of sense'
of some of our early conversations'
as we're simply surveying the visual field of artifacts"
and examining contemporary practice.'
And I would say that the origins of the show in that sense,'
in a kind of optical sense, developed as this suspicion'
or doubt about a cliche that is almost totally'
dominant in its characterization of the architectural field.'
And the cliche goes something like this--'
architecture is a centerless field at the moment.'
And this is a kind of new condition,'
but it's centerless and anything is possible."
And that perhaps in our contemporary condition,'
architecture has lost all measure'
except an oscillation between the spectacular and the banal.'
So this collage by OMA is kind of an emblematic expression'
of this cliche, architecture as a sort of centerless field'
in which anything goes.
This of course was produced as a kind of diagram'
to advocate on behalf of their Dubai Renaissance'
project, which is sometimes known'
as the Dubai slab, the big white thing in the middle.'
And according to OMA, if we adopt the view of this cliche,'
there are only two rational design options.'
We can either compete on the grounds of spectacle'
and make better icons.
That's what everyone in the background"
is doing in OMA's collage.
Or we can design voids in the visual field'
and perform a kind of act of erasure.'
Central to this view is the idea that the canon has collapsed.'
That this let's say core group of mostly Italian buildings"
from 1500 to 1950, let's Alberti to Tehrani,"
is no longer studied in such a way'
that it would give us a kind of measure'
other than this oscillation between spectacle and banality.'
And so we would like to sort of respectfully object'
to this view.
It's quite common, but we would like to propose something else."
And we would like to do so on two grounds.'
The first is this.
And so, of course, this is one of Piranesi's Vedute."
This is his depiction of the Temple of Minerva Medica.'
And I think for us this indicates'
that the canon has always been represented back'
to the discipline as being in a state of collapse.'
So let's say from the very moment"
of the invention of the canon, per se,'
and its various inventions in the 18th century,'
it was being projected back to architects'
through drawing as something in a disordered state'
that must be rationalized from this state of abjection,'
and cleaned up and taken up again'
as a kind of affirmative set of principles.'
So, of course, Piranesi is not alone'
in this kind of depiction of the canon as something'
that must be recovered from an abject state'
through difficulty and rationalization.'
And this is sort of always the way in which it arrives to us,'
and we just need to sort of work harder'
to discern its patterns and tendencies.'
Secondly, aside from the sort of historical truism'
that the canon is always in a state of collapse,'
we would like to claim that we do see fairly evident order'
and rationality in the field.
It's simply not a form of order and rationality"
that could be so easily structured'
by the core periphery model that would be indicated by a cannon'
or a kind of collapse thereof.
So we'll just say that the issue of the canon is moot for us"
or maybe not a part of this discussion, per se.'
And we're interested in a field of relations"
that are more horizontal, that could'
be included under this sort of umbrella term, resemblance.'
Or at least resemblance was a kind of guiding principle'
as we started to detect order and repetition in the field'
as we saw it.
Or at least the field as it's represented"
in the Druker Gallery.
This term resemblance is important for us'
because it indicates this kind of appeal to something shared.'
An appeal to a certain form of cultural agreement'
that precedes speech.
An agreement that is passed between authors'
and establishes continuity between two things.'
And resemblance for us can start in a very simple way, simply'
with the acknowledgment of a kind of visual rhyme.'
Oh yeah.
We have red and green, and green is far and away'
the better pointer.
Here we go.
So it begins with the acknowledgment'
of a kind of visual rhyme.
And it need not be a kind of high genre rhyme.'
Low is absolutely fine with us.
It can even be bodily.
So in this case, we would say you'
can see a kind of rhyme that has to do with protuberances'
and finger like digitation being produced by architects'
and sort of differentiating the detailing in their buildings.'
And although the rhyme may start at the level of intuition'
and a kind of low genre, we think'
it's fairly easy to start to build up"
a degree of sophistication in identifying'
these kinds of through lines or continuities'
in the work of contemporary practices.'
And to do that work, we might lean'
on a text like Foucault's discourse"
on similitude in the Renaissance,'
which, of course, is all about these sort of modes and methods'
of establishing resemblance.
And this speciating resemblance into different techniques'
that we can sort of identify apart from one another.'
And so I'm just going to take you"
through some snippets of the show'
and start to call out these forms of resemblance that'
establish little through lines.
And then after that, Michael will situate those smaller'
similarities inside a kind of much bigger field of ideas'
and possible positions.
So all of these that I'm going to show--"
I'll show four of them now-- are snippets from the wall."
And I'd like to call out these sort of three way continuities."
So in the center we have Ellie Abron's Inside Things."
And for us, this establishes the proposition'
that the architectural digit can clasp.'
That it affords a kind of support'
by entanglement and intimacy.
And then of course Mack Scogin and Merrill Elam's Wolfsburg"
Competition entry project takes on that idea of support'
as a kind of literal proposition.'
To lift the plinth that sort of elevated above the city.'
And it's interesting here that this sort of bodily digitation"
is support for a kind of unadulterated architectural'
plinth that can be re-read as a kind of head'
because of the legs.
And of course it would be the plinth'
that is identified as the head, because it's"
this sort of seat of non bodily knowledge'
atop a bodily support.
On the other side we have Outpost Office.'
This is a selection from their series called'
Computer Architecture, where there'
is no longer this separation between architecture'
and its bodily support, but instead the entire building'
has become enfolded in a kind of clasping digit.'
The exteriorisation of the support'
disappears in favor of these sort of internal pleats'
that might organize the section of the building.'
So for Foucault, this mode of similitude'
would be called analogy.
That each of these is related to the other because of the way'
they are constantly making reference'
to the body as a shared form of agreement between them.'
There is another kind of resemblance'
that we could call convenience.
And convenience would have to do with shared forces operating'
on the same set of material.
Foucault would call it an adjacency of places'
so that their edges touch, and movement, influence,'
and passions can be communicated between these places.'
So for us, Johnston Marklee's Hut House"
would occupy a kind of central position'
in this sort of through line of resemblance'
in that there's a rotation that is kind of playing on the found"
stuff of the eidetic house.
That they are torquing sort of roofs, walls, and windows.'
And it's the same material that is taken up by Sean Canty's Ja"
House, also in a rotation.
And similarly, in one of the artifacts from Erin Besler's"
Low Fidelity series of projects, where again,'
a kind of shearing and rotation are'
operating on this found and known stuff of the house.'
And it is that kind of shared material and shared operation'
that would establish the kind of convenient relationship'
between these.
This is a kind of selection of what'
we would call trabeated stacks.
And here maybe we could borrow the term'
that Foucault uses to describe another kind of resemblance--'
emulation, which is a form of resemblance without contact.'
So if convenience requires this sort of superimposition'
of places and shared materiality,'
emulation does not require that in order'
to set up this field of relatedness between projects.'
Instead, they can work on very different material'
and sort of reflect one another as a kind of gaze'
in the mirror.
So this is Ensamble Studio, the Hemeroscopium House.'
This is our very own Jennifer Bonner from Best Sandwiches.'
I believe this is the Grilled Cheese.'
And Farshid Moussavi is again, one of our very own--'
Divine Folly.
So in each case there is a very clear reflection'
of this idea of the trabeated stack'
and yet, sandwich is radically unlike fragment'
of infrastructure is radically unlike the kind of undulating'
and purely formal perimeter of the concrete slabs'
in the Follies.
So they do not require that shared overlap of place'
in order to perform this reflection.'
And lastly, we would talk about this more distant form'
of similitude that we could term sympathy.'
And this is a kind of drawing things toward one another'
in an exterior and visible movement.'
So here I would like to begin with Toshiko Mori's Dialogue"
in Details, where she is examining'
several important buildings, but only'
extracting a very small slice of their system of construction'
and setting it free in a gallery.'
Painting it entirely white so that it'
becomes being-like or figure-like in its presence.'
And it is that kind of separation then of entities'
sort of pulled out from context that'
allows us to understand a kind of sympathetic relationship'
between figures.
Toshiko's Dialogue in Details, Christ Gantenbein's Athens"
Series of occasional tables that similarly establish'
this kind of figural distance that then allows'
us to relate them as characters in a room to Toshiko's project."
And then on the very end, this is'
a project by Central Standard Office'
and Kelly Bair called The Cat That Ate the Canary.'
These are all radically different'
in terms of their function and let's say"
kind of didactic machinery.
This is an installation.
This is furniture.
This is a bird house.
But it's this mechanism of sympathy"
that allows these figural things by virtue of their standing'
apart to develop a kind of relationship.'
So now what we want to do is make the claim'
and try to convince you briefly that despite this wide variety'
and heterogeneity of work that we're"
drawing from, that there is a mechanism somehow,'
a deep structure that actually generates that these projects'
have in common.
And this deep structure, or what I earlier called a materiality,'
is common across that field.
In 1968, A.J. Greimas provided a kind of little machine'
that he called the semiotic square.'
Of course this contradicts all the anti-semiotic rhetoric'
I was talking about earlier, but it's a matter"
of just using the term.
He's still using the term semiotic,"
which we're claiming that the structure of the square"
works in a non-semiotic way as well.'
So I hadn't realized that before."
I just read that word.
The square is designed to diagram the way in which'
from a single starting point, that an entire complex'
of permutations, positions, a sort of combinatory'
of positions can be derived.
It's essentially a sort of updating"
of actually an Aristotelian logic of contradictions'
and contraries, where a beginning term always,'
of course, produces its other.
But any term will not only have its direct opposite,'
or its contradiction, but will also'
produce other oppositions that also oppose'
its own first contradiction.
Rather than go through the mathematics of this,'
I'm going to give a very quick example of how"
it works with something that I hope you're familiar with,"
which is Claude Levi Strauss' The Raw and the Cooked."
Now in Levi Strauss' work, of course, The Raw and the Cooked,"
raw food and cooked food by the end stand for an entire network'
of social and familial relationships that structure'
not only culinary efforts, but things like the incest taboo,'
and which cousin can you marry and which you can't."
And it's a very elaborate structure"
that finds its root in what Levi Strauss calls'
a culinary triangle.
With Levi Strauss it only has three terms, the raw'
and its opposite, the cooked.
And then something that Levi Strauss says and he's already"
doing the structuralist right thing by saying,'
well anything that has its opposite'
will produce other kinds of oppositions.'
So the raw and the rotten, or the cooked and the rotten.'
So for Levi Strauss, you get this triangle.'
What Greimas does is say that actually it's"
the square that will produce an even more'
interesting fourth term.
Because if the cooked is the opposite of the raw,'
this unknown fourth term here would'
be something like a stronger positively anti raw.'
And Levi Strauss didn't suggest it,"
but the point is that to use the Greimas,'
your mind immediately starts putting together'
other possible logics.
So I'm suggesting fermented, which"
is neither cooked nor raw, but also not quite rotten.'
And what's interesting about it is that it"
is related to the rotten.
It's boiled, right?
But it's also in a way related as a contrary to the cooked,"
because it's a different way of consuming food."
And you can't consume either, at least in this case."
You couldn't consume either raw or rotten."
So you get a highly mobile, a highly dynamic field.'
And it's just this kind of field that we"
wanted to use to structure the work that Andrew just sampled.'
We started in a dialectical opposition'
that we thought all architecture had.'
And that's the opposition between the transcendental"
and the imminent.
It's in philosophy.
It's in Aristotle.
It's also in architecture.
The imminent for us is represented'
by this casting of Ensamble.
Whereas traditional interpretation'
would go back to the architectural image,'
to its signifiers, to its sensory pleasure,'
but the image here by contrast, is produced.'
For example, from the tug of gravity on the concrete,'
which of course has the earth.
You dig out a hole and pour in this slab,'
and then remove the earth, or actually'
raise it up from the earth, but the tug of gravity'
gives it this kind of particular image on the button.'
Or the heat transfers between the concrete and the earth that'
causes certain chemical mutations and colorings'
and different hardnesses.
So this exchange of heat.
In other examples we have this propagation'
of light from unseen sources.
So all of these kind of earthy, bodily, phenomenal,'
and sometimes even cosmic considerations'
that lead to almost--
and if we wanted to think about architecture before speech.'
In this case, it's almost--
In the case of the imminent category,'
it's almost a kind of grunting, babbling,"
stuttering, as before speech in that almost archaic sense.'
You know, the direct opposite of that'
again might be something like Justin Marklee's houses."
And this may not even be the best one'
they were calling transcendental,'
if what we mean by that is a kind'
of attention to form and process,'
but also Boolean operations.
Boolean is just like when you use a search engine,'
you can say this and that, or this or that.'
And you can see here, it's this and this again,"
or it's this or this one.
And you get in these kind of series.'
So what's interesting is Johnston Marklee"
always do about four versions of a single project'
using the same elements.
And that's part of what we're calling transcendental,"
because it has to do with this certain kind of very high level'
mimesis.
The other examples we give are labyrinths'
that are digitally generated, or stochastic patterns'
in elevation.
This is very divorced from the organically related frames'
and cycles of the imminent.
So that's our first dialectic.
The transcendental which attends to issues of form, structure,'
probably type.
Type is a very good example of what'
we're calling transcendental.
These are highly articulable, re-instantiated, re-iterable.'
They're given, whereas these tend to be more found"
in nature or in the lab.
But highly sensible, attention to material over form,'
phenomenon over structure, and topos, or place, over type.'
So that's the first dialectic.
But then there's this other category."
Let's say that we believe in the transcendental project, but not"
its truth.
What will happen in that case is if you think'
you can no longer actually find an answer, what you start'
to enjoy is the pursuit itself, the process, the sheer artifice'
of the discipline driven machinations'
that you go through in design.
And this will be very complicated.'
It will produce projects of traces,'
superimposition, stacks, scatters.'
It'll produce effects like tiling, nesting, buckling,"
pleating.
All of these are these kind of nervous, compulsory,'
kind of hand wringing machinations.'
Because you know you're not going to arrive at the answer,"
but you're enjoying the pursuit.
And then it will be a revelation.'
And this was Andrew's insistence that we name it."
There will be this revelation to this overly compulsive'
processes.
On the one hand, it's related to but kind of opposition"
to the transcend.
It's still formalist, let's say, but now it's"
no longer about a kind of given structure,'
but it's about a revelation of an artifice."
It's certainly not imminent.
It's exactly the opposite of the earthy, phenomenal, bodily,"
mimetic category here.
But what about this one?
How could we get a strong response that'
might be related to the bodily mimesis of the imminent,'
but might also be related to the kind of doubt, and artifice,'
and nervousness about revealing the artifice as opposed'
to in a way believing in the artifice.'
And of course, we found it in a number of projects.'
But again, sticking to our own faculty'
with Mack Scogin and Merrill Elam's Wolfsburg Tower, which"
originally I wanted to call the category creaturely encounters.'
But we stuck with just the idea of encounter'
to match the others.
The characteristics here-- again, like the imminent,'
it involves body.
But in this case the mimesis is only'
an approximation to the human.
It's this just not quite human, which is anxiety producing."
It's this not quite human mimesis"
that provokes this attention toward the creaturely.'
It's as if this thing like a golem in the old Jewish ghettos"
just appeared somehow, right?
To save the city but humans had nothing'
to do with its creation.
It's like architectural golem.
It seems prehistorical, pre-verbal.'
Lacan has a beautiful word that I'm using here"
that when things that are most familiar, most intimate,'
turn out to be not quite right, he'
says the feeling of extimacy.
Or this extimant as opposed to intimate.'
It's this thing that you thought you knew"
that is now radically other.
And I think that categorization, or that explanation, is right.'
And then, finally, when you look at this Greimas'
diagram outside--
imminent, originals, transcendental.'
This is the kind of formalist axis.'
This is the kind of phenomenological axis,'
but this is more phenomenology gone wrong.'
This is kind of formalism, in a way,'
exaggerated and artificial.
So you can start to play with all these different connections'
with the works across.
And then finally-- and I'll stop here--"
what we imagine is again, going back to inscription.'
I said that inscription is when force and--'
if we think of this as a force field'
producing all these vectors and relationships--'
is this what I'm here calling virtual architecture,"
and where the inscription begins here and passes'
through different kinds of disciplinary strategies,'
different kind of archives.
This triangle, or cone, of inscription'
draws from that virtual deep structure that you can't see."
This is the pre-supposed that Wordsworth talks about,'
and then you finally end up with an actual architectural'
project.
All right.
So we thought this was a neat trick'
that one of our diagrams sort of turned upside down'
equals the other.
So I think we'd like to close this segment"
of the conversation between the two of us'
by talking about effects and affects,'
which is maybe a turn from the description'
of possible positions in the ideological field,'
to asking the question, what claims'
can we make with respect to the audience?'
And particularly, what claims can we'
make about the instrumentality of the building with respect'
to the audience?
Or maybe occasionally I should use this word, beholder.'
Because we are indebted in some way'
to the work of Michael Fried.
So let's begin here to start to get at this question."
This is an image of a model that Wonne Ickx and Productora'
did in their proposal for Aalto University.'
And for us, this was the kind of first glimpse of a recurring'
trope that we see again and again,'
almost like a kind of tic, particularly'
in the category that we've decided to call monoliths."
So this is a project by Geers Van Severen.'
All of their projects are numbered, so this is 152.'
This is the Aalto University project by Productora,'
and this is Jesus Vassallo's Water Towers."
But in each of these, we see a similar kind'
of awareness of the frame and a similar kind of clustering'
of towers against one another with respect to the frame'
as though there is a kind of acute interest there.'
That these seem sort of too perfectly framed and too'
perfectly clustered for this to be accidental.'
And I think that we would argue each of these three images'
is in fact this, a kind of tower selfie,'
where the tower is aware of both its position'
as a subject, but also the possible subject positions'
that it engenders.
So what I mean by that.
This is you, the subject.
You're taking a photograph of Kimye,"
but their affects, their deportment, and their bearing'
has a kind of consequence that flows back to you'
as the subject.
So the flatness of Kanye's scowl in a certain way"
denies the importance, or even denies'
the presence of the beholder, you, the subject.'
And Kim's simper does something sort of very different."
And so we would like to sort of start'
to think through the work in those terms.'
In terms of how the affects of the buildings'
start to permit and open up different subject'
positions while they deny others.'
And maybe before we start to rehearse the possible positions'
that are on evidence in the Druker gallery,'
we should just emphasize the kind of difference'
in this mode of thinking from other ways in which affect'
has historically been taken up by architecture.'
So it's clear here that we're trying"
to argue that affect gives architecture a kind of role'
to play almost as an audience member in terms of the way'
that it starts to go to work on subjects.'
But historically, affect has worked maybe more like this.'
So these are the self-portraits of Jean-Jacques Lequeu,'
where he is kind of depicting these extreme emotions.'
And we would call this another different way'
of thinking through affect, where we are interested in how'
buildings make you feel.
What stimulus results in what kind of externally observable'
response?
So this is very different I would say.'
Maybe the work, we would argue, is not'
so interested in how it makes you feel.'
It is, however, using affect to construct possible positions'
with respect to it.
So perhaps with any luck that distinction makes sense.'
So here I'm going to start working"
my way through the second of the diagrams on the wall outside.'
And I'm going to build it up in a series of layers"
that are similar to Michael's description of the Greimas"
square.
And I think we would like to begin with flat affects,'
because I think you will find a great number of the works'
on display build a possible subject position for you that'
is very much like being on the receiving end of Kanye's"
scowl, a kind of a flatness.
And for us, flatness is not homogeneous.'
Instead, it has a kind of near and a far horizon.'
A nearness that we will call an imperious presence,'
and a kind of far horizon that we'll"
call disinterested withdrawal.
So an imperious presence might be something like this.'
Again Geers Van Severen, project 152,'
where the building is quite near,'
but that does not necessarily entail an engagement'
with the beholder.
Instead, it is a kind of aloofness.'
Or this Machado and Silvetti's tower from The Four Squares"
project.
This is the Leonforte tower.
Again, it is quite near, but that nearness'
should not in any way be confused with accessibility.'
It is aloof.
It is imperious.
It is literally above.
And for us, maybe that sense of a kind of imperious nearness'
would be tantamount to let's say Louis the 14th's sort"
of arrival with his retinue.
This is a tapestry, 1670-ish.
It's part of a longer series called The History of the King."
This is documenting Louis' arrival into the Gobelins."
He is attended by everyone, and yet he does not care.'
He is staring out of the frame of the tapestry'
and his attention is elsewhere.
It is a kind of denial of his retinue.'
So if that's the near horizon, I think"
you'll also find examples of this far horizon"
disinterest that takes the form of a withdrawal.'
So this is T.E.A.M., their Detroit Reassembly Plant'
project, where the building is not only withdrawn,'
as in literally hiding as a recluse behind piles of refuse.'
But it is also a form that refuses'
to didactically explain its lumpen appearance in any way.'
It is simply a kind of given.
A slightly awkward given, let's say, that constitutes for us"
a form of withdrawal.
Maybe even more to the point, this is SIFT Studio's Rocks."
And this is an architect withdrawing'
to the kind of hermetically sealed zone of geology.'
Like we may not inquire into its processes.'
It is simply there.
This sort of movement back and forth'
between the near and the far horizon, of the flat'
affects in the show, they are metered also'
in another direction.
So here we might talk about the impassive, the depressed,'
the absorbed, the bored, or the distracted.'
And so this project by First Office.'
I think it's fair to call it bored or boring."
They, in fact, I think, would appreciate'
me designating this as a boring project, or a bored project.'
But there's simply not much here in the kind of white on white."
It's easy to sort of go adrift in the kind"
of total lack of interest in the flat field of the rendering.'
A kind of close relative would be absorbed.'
This is another project by First Office'
for the design of a table that is'
to be assembled out of Ikea parts, but a very'
difficult table.
And all of this kind of delirium of technical notation,'
we would argue, has to do with a kind of absorption'
in the facts of the drawing itself.'
A denial of the beholder in the sense'
that all attention is supposed to be sort of measuring'
the difference between 2 feet three inches'
and 3 feet 6 and 1/4, or whatever it is up there.'
This moment of the kind of absorbed band in flat'
affects for us is very important, because it'
becomes a point of connection.
Or let's say a connective tissue with a very different way"
of thinking through affect in the show'
in a different category of work that has to do with jouissance.'
So in a second I'm going to return to this point, which"
is important to us, where jouissance makes contact'
with the field of flat affects.
But just to kind of quickly rehearse--'
and Michael may want to interject because this is sort'
of right in his wheel house.
But jouissance as I understand it,'
is not only pleasure, but a particular intensity'
to pleasure.
And as French theorists have taken up this term,'
that intensity may also be painful at the same time'
that one experiences pleasure.
So it has these two different modalities.'
And for us, jouissance moves kind'
of upward in increasing levels, not only of'
intensity and pleasure, but let's say also"
in increasing authorization of the beholder.'
So if flat affects have found these various gambits'
for denying your presence, or by sort of completely absorbing'
attention in the field, jouissance'
does something different.
There is a form of invitation to experience'
that is issued by the work.
And so at the very bottom point of jouissance'
would be work that we characterize as feral.'
And for us, this is maybe like a dog digging a hole.'
A kind of total attendance to the task.'
Almost absorption, but still a kind'
of minimum awareness of environment'
and of the possibility of a viewing subject.'
A kind of, let's say, animal awareness of context."
And for us, Bittertang's project, Bessie,"
is a kind of ideal feral.
This one deserves a little explanation'
so I asked Bittertang to submit renderings'
of this project, Bessie.
And in its original conception, let's say in 2013 or '14,"
it was a proposal for a zero waste tent made of cowhides,'
and bones, and remains after the consumption of the cow.'
So you would eat the cows, use their skins,'
and use their bones to make this kind of tent-like inhabitation.'
When I requested a model of this project'
I was told that cows don't scale."
[laughter]
And so instead, they would make us'
a new model out of Cornish game hens'
that were of a size that could fit on the pedestals.'
And so they purchased Cornish game hens, roast them,'
ate them, and produced the model that you'
see on display in the gallery, which'
I think is a kind of breathtaking idea'
about sensibility.
And perhaps one that issues a challenge'
to our very own HouseZero.
I think moving upward through the various strata'
in jouissance is the object.
So here I am indulging myself a little bit.'
This is a project by my own office, The Los Angeles Design'
Group.
And here the abject is in our ability'
to identify these little bits and trinkets.'
A kind of unfolded box, a pipe, some dirt, wood blocks.'
But these have all fallen from the station where'
we might have originally encountered them, as a trinket,'
let's say, in the McMaster-Carr Catalog."
So it is the fall that is responsible'
both for our pleasure that we might'
take in a model like this, but also for its abjection.'
A bit higher up, but also kind of closely related'
to abjection, would be the kind of delightful.'
And this again is Jennifer Bonner of MALL and her Grilled'
Cheese trabeated stack.
And here the delight is not in observing'
the collapse of a system of manners,'
but in its maintenance, no matter how absurd it might be.'
So we can see the sandwich.
The sandwich is not contested.
The sandwich has not fallen.
Similarly, we can see the imprint of a relatively'
reasonable building facades.
And then finally, above the delightful,'
we would place the ecstatic.
This is a project by Millions, Zeina Koreitem, and John May'
one of a series of projects on collectives.'
And here, the delight is in the experience'
of a technique that almost overwhelms'
the material construct on which it plays out.'
And so it's kind of like the pleasure of technique runamuck"
right up until the point where it threatens the integrity'
of the entire enterprise.
And for us, at that sort of limit condition of the ecstatic'
production of architecture, we're"
also starting to introduce a kind of invitation'
to the audience.
A sort of total involvement of architecture'
with people at the scale of the body.'
All of these infinitesimally small little'
crannelations that one would continually'
encounter as you move through the building'
at the scale of yourself.
A kind of a threat of dissolution between you'
and the building, or a dissolution of the distinction'
between you and the building, that is both kind of ecstatic'
and has this kind of painful quality to it as well.'
Maybe as a kind of closing thought'
before we move on to conversation,'
I would say that the diagram that we are not'
talking about too much here at the end'
starts to build a case for us about the place of authorship'
in a show like this.
So if we've expended a great deal of energy"
surveying the field, and attempting to describe it'
with as much precision as we can muster,'
there is this sort of unanswered question of like, what now,'
the task of the architect if we have indeed'
identified a kind of contemporary trope that holds.'
And perhaps we would posit that the signature of the author'
is no longer the kind of operative term'
that we should be looking for.
Instead, it's the kind of author as the maintainer,"
or the author as the one who tends and sort of brings'
to the fore these cultural agreements that'
precede semantic meaning.
Yeah.
Thanks.
[applause]
So we hope we've left time, and we didn't"
leave as much as we tried.
But we hope we've left some time for comments."
Maybe it's obvious, but to emphasize that of course you"
challenge our categorization and you challenge'
what slot we put some of these projects into, which I think'
is kind of the point of trying to find relationships'
by allowing and inventing new types of reading.'
Not just to be satisfied with one mode or another,'
but to try to open up new kinds of reading these projects that'
find connections as much as disjunctions.'
And that we hope is part of the pleasure of the show'
is kind of playing that interpretive game.'
Alexander.
Thank you so, so much for sharing'
all of this art with us.
And I think that there is an incredibly commendable kind'
of attention to reading the field,'
as fragmented and de-centered as it is.'
My question is basically whether it'
is possible to sustain a reading of the models in the hall'
as anything but spectacle.
And if we were to identify in the presentation'
a series of binaries, we might say'
the first of them is imminent versus transcendental.'
Or for my benefit, [inaudible] binary of form or physique'
versus morale and discourse.
And then the second I think is Michael Fried's binary"
of absorption and theatricality.
But I think the pinnacle of my question'
is, when we're calling Bittertang's consumption"
of a chicken anything but theatrical,'
we started to have some questions about the degree'
to which we can sustain differences'
between the bottles on a basis other than theatricality.'
So I guess I wonder how we would how we would start to do that.'
So what I would say, and try to develop if I had time, would'
be that to dismiss the chicken, though it is one of the most'
extreme cases, I think.
But to dismiss it is still to hold'
to a mode of reading which privileges vision'
over other kinds of performances.'
The comparison with zero house is actually really interesting.'
What we normally call zero carbon,'
it still has nothing to do with the possible wastes'
in recycling.
But we don't yet have a way of bringing those kinds"
of very real considerations in.
And it goes without saying that most'
of the preponderance of projects are very preliminary stages'
of experimentation.
Some are actually built, of course, but most are not.'
And I think as an experimentation,'
and even as a kind of manifesto about consumption, recycling,'
that we have to find new ways of evaluating and reading'
those projects.
Fried never leaves the platform of vision'
with his theatricality versus absorption.'
I don't disagree except to say let's think"
about more bodily, earthly, but also more cosmic things,'
as well as vision.
Let me just add one thing quickly'
before you ask your question.
I would say let's not confuse intensity generically"
with theater.
That there are certain agreements'
that must be in place in order to sustain the theatrical that'
don't apply to intensity kind of generically."
And so I think we have to make room'
for some form of presence of the viewing subject that is not'
in that kind of theatrical relationship'
that Fried would ascribe to anything'
that admits of a beholder.
So if I sit down to eat my dinner'
and it happens to be a chicken, that'
is not necessarily theater.
And so I would be interested in kind'
of testing the limits of the intensity of that proposition'
before it sort of slides over into this other form that'
requires another set of agreements.'
Yeah.
I also amplify your thanks for this incredibly revealing talk'
and presentation.
Exhibition.
Michael, can I ask you to engage in active, pure thought?'
You had me at Wordsworth, and what you'
didn't seem to address--
[laughter]
--is the first five words of the talk,'
because you dwelled on epitaph and monument.'
But the quote starts with, "It needs scarcely be said--",'
which is classic preterition, so clearly it need be said.'
Yeah.
Exactly.
That moment is called apophasis, when'
you say it need not be said.
But remember, what I think--
It need not be said clearly means'
that this is really important.
And it is the first line of a book.'
So he's thought about these words."
But again, I just simply read it as an introduction to the fact'
that his interest is going to be things that are not said.'
And it need not be said, because it can be sensed or apprehended'
in other ways.
And so I think there's a circle in that first line"
that it need not be said.
And even the epitaph's real--
And don't forget the other side of apophasis."
What is it called when death speaks?'
Pro-- propo-- proposophis?
It's full of rhetorical machines,"
because an epitaph is often attributed to speech'
from the dead.
So it need not be said is also it can't be said by a human."
And this kind of inhuman quality,'
which some of the things that we keep returning'
to like indifference, boredom, the feral, these'
are also non-human, thing-like qualities that I think'
is in that first line as well.
Lane.
Sorry for the third male question.'
And I have two things.
So first is I was hoping that you would come back'
to the question of the 1960's discourse"
and how that's been read, how that has somehow returned"
or not.
And the second is direct curatorial question'
about the exhibition, which is that on one wall,'
you have these diagrams.
And on the other wall, you have the work itself.'
And in a way, the work itself is organized purely visually,'
purely based on vision.
And I think the analysis that Andrew performed on it'
is largely visual and only transcends being'
visual when you've mapped it onto these diagrams."
So I wonder, why you have on the East wall put the work,'
and on the West wall put the diagrams,'
and not allowed them to in that way,'
speak to each other or not.
Do you want to take on the '60s?
[laughter]
I'll take on the '60s question.
So Rem Koolhaas' AA project, The Berlin Wall,"
which did nothing but photograph the Berlin Wall'
and declare it architecture, was really, really interesting'
in the same way I think that the Tony Smith is interesting.'
That the experience of the highway'
is declared as art or as architecture.'
But then we started generating things and this is by no--'
I don't have this down.
I would like to study this.
Things like Ungers looking at Berlin at the time'
that it's shrinking and accepting the shrinkage."
But even something like Venturi's and Scott Brown's"
learning from Las Vegas, rather than Las Vegas'
is an abject sight.
But accepting the abjection, of course,'
they try to semiotize it.
They try to make it into a semiotic.'
But the very interest in not just'
a vernacular, but an abject vernacular,'
is very close to some of the things that'
are going on now like with First Office is very much that.'
So we were looking I think there are, Oh,'
in Archizoom in the No-Stop City project,'
where the first drawing--
quote unquote drawings of that-- are'
done a typewriter with zeros, slashes, and pluses'
so that they de-skill even the architectural drawing'
process in order to produce this different kind of feel.'
So I think that we're interested in those experimental projects"
that embrace the lack of meaning and try'
to find other sensory, affective, these different--'
To expand the sensorium again.
I'll give you the wall is organized visually but trying"
to spark interests that go that go beyond that.'
And I think the '60s sort of--
The other thing that for an unreconstructed Hegelian,'
as Antoine has pointed out many times that I still am,'
to have a theoretical discourse and an architectural discourse'
align around issues of materiality and non-semantic'
significance, if you will, is just'
thrilling to kind of think about.'
I would also--
Lane, I appreciate the question very much.'
And I would like to maybe put it in relation'
to Alexander's question.
So if Alex is asking, have you indeed escaped'
Michael Fried's judgment of theater?"
And you're asking, have we indeed found"
a kind of escape velocity from the visual field?'
Both of those, I think, are profoundly modern questions.'
Like, is experience describable by this kind of the matrix'
construct?
And to what extent are we going to think through these sense'
data as sort of separate streams where cognition'
is hovering above them?
And maybe we would suggest not--
Non-modern position is maybe too strong.'
But I think we're leaning toward a kind of non-modern position"
where we would not be embarrassed to admit'
of the visual.
We would also simply claim that it is not so easily pried apart'
from all of the other ways in which we might'
sort of walk around the world, and consume it, and think'
about it.
So that the beauty of Foucault's meditation"
in the order of things, that the prose of the world'
where he talks about these Renaissance'
systems of similitude, is that there is no easy way'
to kind of disentangle these primarily visual metaphors'
from the intellectual content that they are organizing'
and related to.
So the kind of onion, and brain, and dome similitude that he'
calls out is optical, for sure, but it is also'
a kind of larger ordering system for the world.'
Your talk was fascinating.
My name's Ann Sussman.
I do a blog called The Genetics of Design.'
I'm a licensed architect.
I think your talk is very, very interesting.'
On the other hand, I think it's stuck in time."
We're in Boston, in Cambridge, the center"
of the biotech revolution.
Harvard actually promoted a lot of that biotech revolution.'
And I think the problem you're going to face going forward"
with this-- this a warning--
is that people are going to start assessing it'
with biotechnological tools.
Right now I'm a designer.
So I know that car designers all use biotech.'
Honda, BMW.
Advertisers all use biotech.
Facial expression analysis.
I've used eye tracking, EEG.
You can no longer talk about Foucault and Derrida.'
Toyota would think you're out of your mind."
And the same brain that looks at a car or looks at an ad,'
is the same brain that looks at a building.'
It's a brain that's 3.6 billion years old."
It's hardwired from birth to like specific images more"
than others.
I'm not going to tell you what it is."
OK.
So part of your, I think, intellectual foundation'
is false.
In the first place, the mind is not a blank slate.'
I'm quoting there Harvard psychologist, professor,"
Steven Pinker, his bestselling book.'
You argue the mind's a blank slate."
The mind's not a blank slate.
Read Steven Pinker.
The other way you're confused in your thinking"
is on one hand, you say, which I agree with, we have'
an emotional brain that thinks.
You're saying that a lot.
But on the other hand, you say we have a thinking'
brain that has emotions.
You cannot have it both ways.
Read Harvard neuroanatomist Jill Bolte Taylor.'
She's got the most hits on YouTube."
She was a neuroanatomist who got a stroke'
and watched her brain go down.
So we have an emotional brain that thinks.'
So how do we really define architectural theory'
knowing we're all emotional?
And here's the kicker.
You can't do it unless you're doing"
the same tools that Toyota and BMW are already using.'
So I think your talk is great.
And I think in a way talking about affect'
giving architecture a role to play,'
that's absolutely what they're studying."
But I think you need to bring your kids'
into the 21st century.
They're going to enter a world--
I know this.
I just got a grant to eye track buildings in the suburbs.'
Your architects won't know how I'm going to assess it."
And I'm going to assess it with hard data."
I'm going to tell them that people"
can't find the front door.
You get it?
So you've got to take your talk to the next level"
because we're in Cambridge, which"
is the center of the biotech revolution.'
The fact is paradigm shifts are brutal.'
They're not nice.
Think about Steve Jobs.
Wasn't a nice guy.
But they're going to happen anyway."
They don't care what you did.
I'm sorry.
I don't mean to be--
But I'd be happy to talk more--
It's definitely fascinating to me that one could--"
Part of the response that I think'
when Andrew was responding to Lane about'
not to deny the visual, but to layer'
other kinds of considerations into it.'
What I would take from your comment is just that.'
That I would love to have a group of architecture people,'
some of whom understood the technology that you're saying."
But to bring it and add it to other techniques of reading.'
Rather than let's say, let's forget the old but--"
Let me just finish.
Let me just-- One more thing because the one thing'
that you're recommending, it tends"
toward the purely empirical.
So that any dimension that cannot be put in terms of data'
will be ignored, which is in architecture, or in art,'
or in culture, is a huge dimension of something that'
cannot be put into data.
So you're going toward a kind of empiricism"
that's very sophisticated, but it's still in empiricism."
It has no transcendental dimension'
of virtuality or speculation.
This is a longer conversation.
No, no.
And I would love to have it.
Yeah.
And I would love to have it with you.'
It's very, very powerful.
Yeah.
The most powerful companies in the world would be using it.'
And that's what is defining their designs."
No.
What's defining their designs is the economic hope"
of that technology.
We're not talking about an economically driven reading"
system here.
You're talking about a data system"
that the hope lies in its bottom line,'
not in its cultural value.
Modern architecture is about technological revolution.'
If it weren't for the steamships,"
we wouldn't have had modern architecture, basically."
And so now modern architecture is'
faced with a fantastically disruptive new technology.'
As disruptive as steamships were.'
We could talk later.
I'd be happy to give you my card."
I think it was a great talk.
You can come to my class.
[laughter]
You're on.
You may have stopped the conversation.'
Oh.
OK.
Why justify your entire reading system'
using post-structuralists when you're"
doing a structuralist project?
Oh, they gave me a mic.
Are you guys ready?
But all the post-structuralists you like to cite'
reject the concept of deep structure,'
and you're trying to re-imbed one."
Why do you do that?
Yeah.
See.
I always feel that traps are set then'
if you don't follow a kind of linear logic."
Why can't I be structuralist and post-structuralist"
based on the kind of explanatory power of certain models?'
Where did she go?
Oh.
Why can't I continue to use Foucault or Derrida if they"
help me explain something, but without worrying'
about the correctness and the purity of keeping it structural'
or letting it be post-structuralist when'
the one came from the other.
I mean, when Derrida writes to the criticism of Levi Strauss'
and says that he doesn't understand structuralism"
because he's too descriptive and synchronic,"
post-structuralism was born.
But the one came from the others.'
So I don't know why I have to be pure."
You're asking me to be pure.
It should make sense that if you want your philosophy'
or whatever this is supposed to be--'
It's not philosophy.
It's not philosophy.
I never said I was doing philosophy.'
No.
I never said I was doing philosophy.'
And also, Levi Strauss is not a philosopher and Derrida,'
I'm not even sure he's a philosopher."
And de Man is certainly not a philosopher.'
They're literary people, and I'm an architectural theorist."
And I'm a bad historian, but I'm a very good"
architectural theorist.
And I need philosophy, because I use it.'
I don't have to be correct with it."
I don't have to be.
Well then why should we buy the existence of the deep structure'
you describe?
All you've told us is that a lot of these things"
seem to look similar.
Where is the deep structure in that?'
I mean, they all look at each other's stuff."
That's not deep structure.
That's culturally historically specific structure."
We all read Art Daily.
We all look at the same magazines.'
Where's the deep structure in that?"
I think the attempt was--
as preliminary as it was--
to try to look open mindedly and speculatively of a generation.'
They're more than one generation,"
but there is a certain age group that'
seem to be sort of trending toward certain new'
sensibilities that architecture has not looked at lately.'
And we found that really interesting.'
And as Andrew said, it had assumed'
that there was no center.
And we're not looking for a center."
It had been assumed that there was no structure, that people'
were just doing their own thing.
And I just don't believe that that's possible"
when we live in the same world.
And our response to that world will--'
by that the fact that we're in the same world--"
will have something in common.
And a biologist and an architect may find common ground'
structurally because they live in the same world.'
And that's history is based on is finding those connections."
So we're just trying to find--
That's the fundamental premise about history"
that Foucault rejects.
Stop trying to teach me lessons about Foucault. OK.'
I can use Foucault, and I understand Foucault.'
I can disagree with Foucault. I don't have to use philosophy"
as a guidebook.
I don't have to.
But you need to present arguments for why--'
I had half an hour.
Give me more time.
I will.
I need more time.
Why are we getting beat up?
[laughter]
It was a bad lecture.
Thanks for the talk.
So I really love this idea of trying to survey the field'
and figure out what's going on, because I think there's"
a tendency to say so much is going on'
that we just have to throw up our hands and sort of jump in.'
But I think if I could be convinced'
that you could survey the field and create even like, a Hegel'
level master history of what's going on,"
I would follow you there all the way.'
So my question is, if what you're trying to do"
is survey the field, how are you defining the field such'
that only the things in this exhibition are included?'
And I don't want to be too pointed about it,"
but if it is that you're just trying"
to sample a kind of vanguard that is suggesting'
the direction of the history, then'
why is it that it's mostly these sort of small, sort"
of projectless, sort of bourgeois North American'
and Western European practices?
Thank you.
It's very bourgeois.
It's very North American.
It's our friends.
Yeah.
No I mean, I think--
it seems to me as though many of the questions'
are being launched from a place that sort'
of presumes an infinite and infinitely neutral data set.'
And I use the word data quite intentionally,'
as though we could sort of like, look down from above'
on every architectural project within the last 35 years'
and make informed selections that'
would then result in their presence in the gallery.'
And I would like to posit two things.'
I'm not sure that's a useful exercise."
And secondly, that's certainly not"
what we're trying to do at all.
We're trying to construct a kind of mythos"
really out of whole cloth that has'
a certain kind of interior coherence to it'
that is probably more intended as a kind of generating'
mechanism for reducing the crippling self-consciousness'
of young architects as they attempt to do more stuff.'
More than it is an attempt to describe'
anything in empirical terms, or god forbid, correct terms.'
I have no interest in that.
So I would say what's out there--"
well it's A, available, intellectually available."
It's B, work where we feel quite confident that the GSD has"
a kind of generative role in the initiation of certain strands'
of thought.
And so we are already a kind of bounded system'
if we want to take the sort of data view.'
Certain agreements have been made'
and we're all in this room.
And I think if this isn't an entirely accurate reflection"
of all of the people in this room,'
there are a few lies in there, we hope it's a compelling one."
And the power to compel would be far more important to us'
than the kind of accuracy of any single move.'
Yeah.
What I appreciate is that a lot of these things that'
led to this exhibition--
This is a convergence of a lot of things'
that the school has in place.
Like Alice, where we first talked about that Wordsworth'
passage.
At a symposium, the sort of salon,'
that Jennifer and Andrew organized'
where we first started using a certain kind of vocabulary.'
In the various convergences from classes, to other lectures,'
to visiting critics, to trips.
There's a kind of convergence and an excitement"
that the GSD has a way of convening and collecting'
that just to amplify what Andrew just said,'
that I hope we can continue.
And move forward again, without worrying about--'
We need to be rigorous.
We need to be accurate.
We need to be rigorous.
But we also need to just speculate and imagine.'
And I think that part of what the exhibition is trying to do'
is to reward imagining.
And I think it's been really enjoyable to talk about it"
and work with it.
And thank you all so much for coming.'
Thanks a lot.
[applause]
