Hi, good evening.
We're actually going to get started."
More or less on time, which is shocking.'
I'm very pleased to host another event in a series of lectures"
and conversations hosted by the master'
in his own engineering program, which, as you know,'
is a collaborative endeavor between the GSD'
and the Paulson School of Engineering and Applied'
Science.
We are thrilled to have Harry West here tonight.'
And I will introduce him in a moment.'
Let me just take a minute, initially,'
to trace very briefly the history of a company that'
has had a decisive influence in shaping many'
of the early interactions we've had"
with various forms of technology from music'
tapes to personal computers.
The history of frog is somewhat representative'
of the profound changes that the field of product design'
has undergone, from giving shape to functions and needs'
to system-based consultancy and strategy.'
The formation of frog actually dates back indirectly to 1969--'
most of you were not around then, I think--'
when Hartmut Esslinger found Esslinger Design in the Black'
Forest area in Germany.
The company was a product design company'
in the traditional sense, giving shape to products,'
and excelled really in the consumer electronics area.'
The Sony Walkman was one of the early signature products.'
After meeting with Steve Jobs, the company'
eventually relocated to California,'
renamed itself of frog design in 1984.'
Now also working for Apple oversea,'
the early designs for the Macintosh computers'
were produced by frog design.
These early McIntosh computers are now'
part of a permanent collection of the Whitney Museum of Art.'
It was finally in 2005 that the current company of frog'
was formed, and Harry West has been its CEO since 2015.'
frog today focuses on global design and innovation'
with an emphasis on user experience in industries,'
such as financial services; telecommunications;'
health care; enterprise software; mobility;'
financial services; I actually said already,'
government services and consumer products.'
Harry leads a talented group of designers, strategists,'
researchers, technologists, and program managers'
who strive to improve the daily experiences of people'
around the world.
Harry has degrees in engineering from Cambridge University,'
in technology and policy from MIT,'
and a PhD in robotics from MIT as well.'
He has led design and innovation at MIT, Continuum, and Prophet'
before joining frog.
He's no stranger to the GSD.
He's been active on the external advisory board of the NDE"
Program.
He lives locally, and each week, works from a different frog'
studio in San Francisco, Austin, New York, Boston, London,'
Milano, Munich, and Shanghai.
He's flying out tomorrow, so we're"
happy to have you here today.
And without much further ado, please welcome Harry West.'
[applause]
Thank you, Martin.
Very honored to be here.
I look forward to talking with you for the next few quarters,'
an hour or so about design, AI, and customer experience.'
Servant or Svengali?
That is the question.
I do not know the answer, but I will share some thoughts'
around that.
Please feel free to interrupt.
I'm told that you won't, but I'm going to ask anyway."
So we are living in the age of experiences,'
magical experiences.
And I think that this image captures'
that sense of awe in her face, that little girl's face,"
because she is about to meet a princess or somebody who'
knows a princess.
And this is the moment that she's"
been dreaming of for years.
And that princess knows her name,'
and she is going to greet her by name on her birthday.'
And that is a memory that's going"
to live with her for the rest of her life.'
Now that is all facilitated by its interesting technology'
right there on her wrist that you'
didn't notice until I pointed it out;"
that enables Disney to know who she is'
and to track her throughout Disney World and her parents;'
and for Disney to let her in without hindrance'
into this magical world; and for the princess or the person who'
knows the princess to greet her by name.'
And that's magic.
And for that magic, her parents have saved up for many years,'
probably, to give that their daughter'
this extraordinary experience.
And the experience is going be so wonderful for her'
that they're going to try to save up again to bring her back"
next year.
And even if they don't do that, their daughter"
will remember this for the rest of her life.'
And when she has children, she will'
want to bring them back to Disney World'
as well to share that experience that she remembers so fondly'
from her childhood.
This is the age of experience.
Now, not all of us every day experience something quite as'
magical as that.
Or, we're not aware of it as we're experiencing it."
But in fact, every day-- in fact, I can see some of you'
in the audience right now using technology'
in a very magical way.
And we're so oblivious to that.
We're so used to that.
And every day, we're enjoying the products and services"
of the companies that we buy from.'
And those experiences are extraordinary.'
How did this happen?
Technology and design.
I think that probably the most important technology'
that most of us don't pay any attention to anymore"
is the internet.
And when that became public in around 1993'
with the launch of Mosaic, that unleashed the possibility'
for the experiences that we're enjoying today."
That was followed shortly thereafter'
by the mobile phone and mobile communication.'
It has changed a lot since then.
But this came out around 1999 and was'
the first mobile communication technology or smart phone.'
And then, followed quickly around 2002'
by the first social network, Friendster--'
still big in Malaysia, I believe.'
And that unleashed a revolution.
Because with the power of the internet'
and mobile phones and social networks,'
our opinions as individual consumers'
mattered more than ever.
And with a tweet, we could bring down a brand.'
Or with a tweet, we could even bring down a candidate,'
as it's happening today.
And so, what happened was that instead of the consumer'
rotating around the enterprise, we'
went through a Copernican revolution.'
And the enterprise began to rotate around the consumer'
because each individual consumer has'
a power of communicating through social networks'
with every other consumer.
And that opinion matters.
And it's that collective voice of all of us"
that determines the fate of companies, large and small.'
And so, that today, every company'
is determined to deliver the very best possible customer'
experience.
Their future, their very existence, depends on it.'
And this is the revolution that has happened over the last 20'
years or so during our lifetime.
And so, today, we experience these extraordinarily high'
quality products and services.
And I'll just go through some obvious examples"
of extraordinary high quality, like the BMW automobile'
or your iPhone.
Or for some of us, for some people, their automobile'
insurance company--
extraordinarily high quality and a highly rated customer'
experience.
On Netflix, how we choose our movies.'
Almost every product and service that we interact'
with today, the experience has been very painstakingly'
designed for our delight.
We are all like that little girl greeting the princess.'
These companies know us by name often,'
and they've designed the experience around us."
And we love it, and we pay for it.'
And if we're ever disappointed, we let everybody know."
And then, a new technology came along.'
And I think that the first paper around deep learning'
and backpropagation came around 2006.'
And that is just beginning to unleash a new revolution.'
And we don't really know where that is going."
And so, what I want to do today is explore with you'
where the revolution of AI and design'
is going to take us, and think about what good can come of it'
and what traps there may lie in our future.'
So that's the question that we want to address."
And before I do that, I'm going to share"
a little bit about frog because I would'
like to show you some pictures about some of the work'
we have done.
Because I'm so proud of the company that I work for."
So, frog.
Rumor has it that frog stands for Federal Republic of Germany'
because Hartmut came from Germany.'
I don't know if that's really true."
And Hartmut has some other stories,'
which I will not relay today.
But frog is in the business of advancing the human experience.'
We design customer experiences, and we're constantly"
looking for ways to advance those experiences,'
to make them even better for people.'
We started, as Martin described, back in the early '80s"
when Steve Jobs was looking for the best designer in the world'
and found Hartmut Esslinger, and said,'
Hartmut, I need you to design my computers.'
And Hartmut said, Steve, I will do that.'
But I will not work for you--
which is why he moved his company to California'
and set up right next door to Apple'
and designed most of Apple's computers in the early years,"
including the first Macs, the Apple 2 that is shown here.'
And what you see here is a revolution'
because it is leading a company through a transformation'
enabled by new technology and changing customer expectations.'
It's a revolution because she is smiling."
She is filled with happiness as she uses her computer.'
Until this time, computers were primarily work-related.'
They were industrial products or military products.'
And Steve Jobs and others had the vision'
to transform an industry from being a business to a consumer'
product industry.
And as a result, it's now, perhaps,"
the most valuable company in the world.'
Technology is really not that easily distinguishable'
from magic.
And magic makes us smile, whether it's"
the computer or the experience that this little boy.'
Because boys like to go to Disney World too,'
being greeted by Mickey Mouse.
And the challenge today is how do we deliver a better'
experience for customers?
And the economic advantage is in being'
able to deliver that experience in a way that'
is cost effective.
So this is recent work that we've just"
launched or helped Ikea launch, which'
is their new line of smart lighting.'
Smart lighting has existed for several years now.'
But the challenge was how to make it so simple and seamless'
that anybody could use it; and so low cost'
that, as Ikea talks about it, it is'
designed for the many people.
So that anybody can use it in a Western society.'
It's low cost.
It is very simple.
It is very secure.
It is lighting for anybody.
And of course, the measure of how well you're doing today"
is the Net Promoter Score.
And I trust that everybody here is familiar with Net Promoter'
Score.
That is the ultimate measure for how good'
your customer experience is.
And senior executives today are living in fear of this score'
because their compensation or their future in the company'
will depend on how well they're doing on their Net Promoter"
Score.
It's a measure of, are your customers willing to promote"
or say they will promote your product,'
your brand, your company to other people?'
If that is high, your company will grow.'
If it is low, you'll probably go out of business."
So the Net Promoter Score is super important.'
And this is a service that we designed with Saudi Telecom'
in Saudi Arabia.
It's called Jawwy.
It's a new telecom service.
And apparently, according to the CEO,'
it's now got the highest Net Promoter Score of any telecom"
provider in the world.
So we're super proud of that.
And what Jawwy is an example of is'
how design mediates technology.
Because what's on that screen shown in the top right"
is only possible because the technology--'
the, about, 10 or 11 technology providers'
that are enabling that to appear on the screen.'
And what design is doing, as shown in that orange layer'
beneath the products, is we are mediating.'
We're coordinating.
We're channeling all of that technology"
so that that woman looking at her phone'
gets a single unified experience of all of those technologies.'
And that's what makes it work for her."
So that's frog.
And we're about 400 people globally."
We're in these studios across the world--"
North America, Europe, India, China.'
And now let's talk a little bit about the power of design."
Hartmut Eslinger talked about form follows emotion.'
That was a response to form follows function.'
And Hartmut recognized that it was in motion.'
That was the goal of design.
Our job is to seduce.
That's what we do.
We are licensed to seduce.
We design, we create products and services that you want.'
And there is, I'm sure, people here"
who are lusting after the latest iPhone, which we had nothing'
to do with, but which follows in the heritage'
that frog and Hartmut helped to create some 40 years ago.'
So design can seduce, and that that's"
why we get paid to do our jobs.
That is my job.
Our job is to create good design that improves our customers'"
experience, that shape their behavior,'
so that the business that paid us grows.'
It's mercantile.
It's commercial.
But that's the business that we're in."
That is the business of design.
And design's reach has spread very far."
If we go back 40 years, we were designing things like this--'
objects.
And that was the primary role of design.'
Today, design has moved to the far top right hand'
corner of my graph.
And we're designing systems of things, or experiences."
We've gone from designing discrete products to systems"
of brand, product, and services; and then also building'
the capabilities within the enterprise'
to continue their design and development.'
That's the role of design today.
And one way to think about that is'
to think that, ultimately, we're designing customer experience."
And back when Hartmut was designing the original Mac,'
he was designing the custom experience'
of a discrete product.
Today, we're designing the customer experience"
of an entire company.
And by customer experience, we mean all of the interactions'
and impressions that people have with an organization'
over time--
shaping their opinions and in turn, the economic value'
of the brand.
And those interactions can be through many different touch'
points-- through web, through mobile, through in-store,'
through call centers, through physical products,'
through buildings, through spaces,'
all of the interactions with the brand.'
And those impressions can be deliberately designed.'
Buy the product.
But more often today, let's think back"
to that social network, the mobile phone.'
More often today, those impressions'
come from friends and families and anecdotes from colleagues,'
from earned and unearned media, and PR.'
That's where we hear about the products and services today--"
from our Facebook wall, from our feed.'
That's what tells us what our friends are talking about."
And often, we care about the feedback'
we're getting beyond the moment of purchase,"
but throughout the ownership and consumption of that product.'
That's the customer experience.
And that's what we have to design so that people love"
using it, so that people recommend it,'
so that you go back and buy it again,'
and so that your friends buy it too.'
That's what we do.
Now AI adds a new dimension to customer experience.'
And that's what we want to talk about."
AI enables multi-dimensional design.'
Let me explain.
So, here's a design for a digital experience for AI,"
which is a large insurance company, particularly in Asia.'
And we have helped to lead them through'
a digital transformation.
And when you look at that screen, we have x and y.'
And that changes over time.
But today, there is a new access in design, and that's you."
And by you, I mean you.
So, what's happening is that screen knows who you are."
And they know a lot about you.
They know your demographics.
They know how you are interacting'
with the screen in the moment.
They know, based on history, how people'
like you are going to behave in the future.'
And they can use that knowledge to make your experience better'
and to guide you in certain directions.'
So we look at AI as a tool that designers'
use to make the experience of customers'
even more convenient, even more seamless, even more emotionally'
connecting.
It's great.
Why would you not want to do that?'
And here some three simple ways that we can use'
AI in our design.
We can use AI to develop new ways to interact.'
We can interact easily today through speech or text,'
for example.
And AI can help us to understand or help a machine to understand'
what that speech or text means.
We can simplify the experience by anticipating what'
is going to be easier for you.
So we can make judgments on the fly.'
I say, we, I mean, the machine can make judgments on the fly'
as to what is going to be easier for you to navigate and offer'
those up for you.
We can make things more relevant.'
And again, I say we, I mean the machine can make'
things more relevant to you.
But optimizing the offers by enticing you with things by'
offers that you are more likely to buy.'
And all of this will happen seamlessly.'
And generally, you're not aware that it's happening."
And it's been enabled by that clever algorithm that was first"
written about in 2006.
Because suddenly, once we introduce deep learning,'
then the ability to recognize speech, for example,'
went from a high error rate to a very much lower error rate.'
So suddenly, speech recognition became practical.'
It was a breakthrough.
It was unanticipated.
It was a surprise that it worked well.'
And it continues to surprise us that it works it well.'
But it does.
And so, this leads to all sorts of possibilities.'
And I'm not going to show you any current clock client"
work, because that would violate some confidentiality.'
So I'm going to show you some examples"
that different frogs in our different studios'
around the world have created to demonstrate'
what they're working on in a more abstract way."
So we can create systems for conversational health.'
We can streamline access to complex services'
and support with flows as simple as just using a WhatsApp chat.'
And so, this can be our health care experience in the future.'
Or at least, how we access health insurance,'
perhaps, or our car insurance.
And so you're having a conversation with a device."
And the device understands you because it understands text'
and it anticipates your needs.
And then it offers you things that it thinks'
will be more attractive to you.
And it's fun and simple to use.
And there you go.
You just bought itself some insurance.'
Here's an example that we have worked on"
with a financial service company.'
The financial service company discovered'
that people were leaving their website before they completed'
a transaction, and that was a problem for them.'
It was partly a problem because they weren't completing"
the transaction, but it was mainly'
a problem because of their next action, which'
was to pick up the phone and call customer service.'
And customer service is very expensive.'
So they asked us to look at ways that we could improve that--'
make it easier for the consumer, for the customer--'
and also reduce their costs by having less load'
on their customer service lines.
So this is a very simple model.
There's questions around allocation."
If you have investments, you may want'
to think about how you're going to allocate money."
There's questions around transfers--"
how you're going to transfer money from one fund to another."
And questions around rebalancing-- how'
are you going to rebalance your fund.'
And for those of you with 401(k)s or investments,'
you are probably familiar with these challenges.'
What we discovered was that customers were getting partway'
through one of these operations, and then they were giving up.'
It was too difficult for them.
Or they weren't quite sure what to do,"
and they were phoning customer service.'
And we looked into it.
And we discovered, using a deep learning network,'
that we could characterize the behavior'
of different customers.
And then we could, on the fly, modify'
the web experience, the online experience,'
to make it easier for them.
