Good evening, everyone.
So glad you could make it to this lecture.'
The chair, Anita Berrizbeitia is involved this evening'
with the [inaudible] Visiting Committee,'
so she's asked me to introduce our speaker this evening,"
Michael Jakob.
And I do so with great pleasure and honor.'
So just a very quick introduction.'
In conformity with the conventions of the genre,'
which typically allows for a humility, inspiring,'
and/or numbing enumeration of publications, projects,'
laurels, and institutional associations,'
sometimes oddly constellated and at other times forming novel'
intellectual geographies including, in this case,'
the possibility of faux mountains,'
first a few words about our distinguished guest,'
[? vita. ?] A documentary filmmaker and radio journalist,'
philosopher and scholar, exhibition curator,'
and editor of a prominent journal, COMPAR(A)ISON.'
Jakob teaches comparative literature'
at Grenoble University and history and theory of landscape'
at hepia.
The latter, hepia, because of, or rather in spite'
of my pronunciation-- and I should never attempt French'
when I'm nervous or rushed, and at the moment I'm both--"
might at first sound, might at first hearing'
sound like Hestia, the god of the hearth, of the oikos'
or ordering principles of architecture'
as such who was venerated on the Acropolis.'
Rather, hepia is an acronym.
As naturally rendered in Helvetic family of type,'
universalizing and unmistakable, it'
stands for the [speaking french]..'
The highest ambitions and underlying challenges'
internal to these mutually supporting fields'
were examined in the touring exhibition,'
The Swiss Touch in Landscape, in which Jakob'
sought to establish--
not to establish or validate a school of Swiss landscape'
architecture, but rather to identify'
a certain general idea.
Lately, we speak and think much of natural cultures,'
specifically and perhaps troublingly'
what they once were or had been, a tense discussion at that,'
but one made so more compelling in Switzerland,'
a republic of four national languages, three of them'
are officially recognized by the federation,'
federal confederation, a place Max Frisch once'
called a country without utopia, a complication of geographies'
that unite in a collective will to "work with necessity,"'
a phrase Jakob derives from the Enlightenment era polymath'
Albrecht von Haller.
A more recent literary scholar to these remote places,'
Lytle Shaw saw in the bridges of Robert Maillart'
and the photography of the brothers Harry and Bruno'
[? wehrli ?] a struggle against gravity.'
In [? shaw's ?] genre-bending account,"
the struggle is tragicomic.
As for gravitation, we are meant to understand'
from other more reliable sources that it is a universal law.'
I think I've already provided enough hints"
while presenting Jakob's very considerable accomplishments"
that some thought needs to be given'
to the question of the generic and the specific.'
We are, after all, called tonight'
to hear about the new generic.
As you'll note on the lecture program, the words in question,"
like a picturesque eye-catcher, appear [non-english speech],,'
a sign, if any, that there is perhaps more to it than first'
appears, or perhaps less.
Literary theory, a field in which Michael is just'
phantasmagorically well-prepared and trained,'
provides the most relevance, though arguably not'
the most comprehensive discourse in the general and particular.'
That distinction belongs to botanical and zoological'
semantics, in the service of which nomenclature conventions'
make universal sense of the Latin binomial system composed'
of the generic name and the specific epithet.'
One of its fondest literary proponents'
was the Genevan exile, Jean-Jacques Rousseau,'
an [inaudible].
But certainly, the best known of the literary critical flowers'
is [inaudible] discourse in poetry in Samuel Johnson's"
Rasselas, an epilogue about happiness,'
to cite the name of a relatively unfamiliar genre.'
The business of the poet, Johnson writes,'
is to examine not the individual, but the species,'
to remark general properties in large appearances.'
The poet does not number the streaks of the tulip,'
or describe the different shades in the verdure of the forest.'
Needless to say, there were dissenters'
from Johnson's prescription of these features, which one"
poet may vigilantly remark upon and another carelessly neglect.'
William Blake, most notably, disdained'
this latter platonic theory of perception.'
"To generalize is to be an idiot," he exclaimed.'
"Particularize is alone distinction of merit.'
And this all sublimity is founded'
on the minute discrimination"
George Saintsbury, the literary historian and wine'
connoisseur-- and I think that latter attribution somehow'
matters in this context--
was more measured in his response.'
But despaired of the potentially leveling effects,'
we are off to sacred heights now if the poet must, in his words,'
"consult the laziness and dullness of his readers'
by merely portraying prominent and striking features."'
Such an accommodation would rather'
rule out poetic strangeness.
It would rather make convention and familiarity the keys'
the poetic kingdom of heaven.
Who am I to say, but entering heaven,'
which is said to be above, should not be that easy.'
What I can say most assuredly is that Michael Jakob was not'
Samuel Johnson's man.
He is vigilant, careful, but also, more importantly,'
a creative and playful observer, every marker,'
to use Johnson's phrase, a phenomena, capturing not only"
that which is apt to be overlooked,'
but also finding what no one else thought to look for'
and making his recorded discovery as fresh as the new'
found thing in the world.
To read his most recent book, The Bench in the Garden of 2017'
is to recognize instantly and by turns what a gifted storyteller'
he is, which is what any engaging interpreter hopes'
to be.
What is the new generic?
Is it merely the newness of it that makes it particular?'
Can the generic in itself be specific?'
I can't wait to hear.
So I will take my very unbench-like seat'
in the audience and invite Michael Jakob to the podium.'
Thanks a lot.
Thank you.
Thanks.
[applause]
Thanks a lot for the invitation.
The general idea of this presentation'
is a rather simple one.
And it's a straightforward one.
Can we speak today of the rise of a new generic in landscape'
architecture and, more generally,'
in the planning disciplines?
Are we faced to an ongoing standardization'
with the result of a more uniform landscape?'
Does contemporary design produce a banal reality?'
And if so-- and I really believe that at least partly,'
it's the case--
for what reasons?
And should designers react to it?'
And should we educators react to it as the world around us'
becomes more uniform?
My idea is to put it differently and to say it'
right now that we are, indeed, confronted'
with the strong and negative impact of a new generic that'
fabricates an increasing number of extremely similarly'
designed landscapes everywhere around the world.'
The terms we use in order to describe the world'
are, however, never neutral.
And they need some form of initial explanation.'
Banal, ordinary, uniform, uniformity, standardized,'
generic, the same, sameness, homogeneous, there is a lot,'
there exists a lot of different categories'
which we can use to describe the phenomenon I'm interested in."
Banal, for instance, originally from French, banal,'
common to all, means so lacking in originality'
as to be obvious and boring.
Generic is that which is not specific,'
lacking imagination or individuality, the original,'
if you want.
Ordinary is something with no special or distinctive'
features, the normal.
The ordinary is not interesting or exceptional.'
It is commonplace.
Standardized is something that conforms to a standard.'
Sameness means lack of variety, uniformity, or monotony.'
This extremely rapid survey shows us'
that there is a system which implies both value'
judgments and formal criteria when'
we deal with the phenomena I have in mind.'
We could organize it by a strictly dualistic system'
of propositions--
original versus unoriginal, variety versus monotony,'
interesting versus boring, specific versus common,'
individuality versus standard, special versus commonplace,'
distinct versus uniformity, exceptional versus ordinary,'
and so on.
The term I find most interesting,'
at least in order to begin with, is standard'
because it relates not only to a noun, but to a verb,'
to standardize.
I don't want to start with moral or aesthetic or formal"
criteria, but with standardization,'
given that it suggests at the same time'
a process, a general framework, and a historical background.'
Let's initiate therefore with the last element,"
a brief survey concerning the history of standards'
and standardization.
Standardization begins, as we know, in Great Britain'
with a small object, the screw.
The first national standard worldwide'
was the one regarding this screw thread in 1841 stating'
thread angle of 55 degrees.
Joseph Whitworth, the promoter of the British Standard'
Whitworth, or BSW, was so successful'
that the British railway adapted his system.'
Standards go from the tiniest screw to railway systems'
and then to the English Standard Committee'
founded in 1901, that is, to the first industry standards.'
From the beginning, standardization'
is, however, not limited to the production'
of industrial objects.
It is rather a process of articulating and influencing'
technical knowledge.
Multi-disciplinary by essence, standardization touches several'
aspects at the same time--
economics, politics, science, technology, labor, business,'
and even culture.
If we consider units of measurement'
as another essential element of standardization,'
we get aware that it touches even our Weltanschauung,'
the way we actually look at the world.'
As for measurements, we should not'
forget that [? condicere, ?] the French ideologist of the meter'
and of other standardized units links standardization'
with the French Revolution and the idea of rationality'
shared by everyone.
This is the original meter in Rue de Vaugirard in Paris.'
Another aspect we have to take into consideration--'
and I'll come back to it later on--"
is the almost immediate application'
of standardization to the most advanced technologies'
of communication.
We can easily trace a line from the development'
of the global telegraph standard,'
and a very important instrument of British imperialism,'
to the railroad system and to electricity'
and to the contemporary internet standards.'
Standardization is, however, never neutral.'
On the contrary.
Think of standardization of, for example,'
an industrious-- or here if have some examples of the railway'
system and standardization becoming'
more and more important with the railway system'
and what happens when things are not so much standardized.'
And standardization is never neutral.'
So it thinks of the standardization'
of industrial parts in American armories for the production'
of muskets, for example.
And once standardization became a major trend'
in the 20th century, the danger of the application'
of mass production to biology, for example,'
very well suggested in Huxley's Brave New World where, I quote,"
he speaks about "standard men and women."'
Or we could think here again standardization of mankind'
or think about Westworld and the perfect cyborgs and so on.'
A relatively recent example of a successful standardization'
is the container.
Containers existed already in the 19th century.'
But standardization really became important'
in the 20th century.
While the first international standard was adopted in 1933,'
the new ISO standard, what are now'
usually 40 foot or 12.2 meter containers,'
was imposed only after an 1960.
This kind of centralization raises, of course,'
no real questions.
The disappearance of differences and of variety in containers'
is no problem.
But it's, rather, the solution of a problem."
If it comes to objects where aesthetics matter,'
things are, however, more complicated.'
In an important book few people read today,'
The Shape of Time by George Kubler, it was, I think,'
Robert Smithson's favorite book, Kubler"
puts up a very interesting theory of things.'
His main idea is that objects exist always in series.'
The series begins with prototypes'
which permit the development of different models.'
And then the series lives on until, at a certain moment,'
the series comes to an end.
The series of containers, for example,'
start in the 19th century.
And once the international standard was adopted,'
every possible development inside the series'
comes to an end.
Let's come now to a second way to try"
to enter the problem of standardization,'
so the relation between identity and difference in three'
fields relevant for landscape architecture.'
What about difference, variety, individuality, first of all,'
in architecture, then in a history of the city,'
in urbanism, and, certainly, in the'
built environment in general?
Dealing with architecture at the very general scale,'
we could speak of standardization or uniformity'
by highlighting several aspects.
Take the formal uniformity of buildings,'
the reproduction of almost the same form in time and space.'
Examples could go from the classical and neoclassical'
architecture to the international time style.'
It is typical, for instance, not to recognize immediately'
the age of neoclassical architecture.'
Normally, when we see these examples, we'
always-- we say they all look the same.'
Another example of uniformization'
is the use of the same material.
Still another one is stylistic uniformity.'
Here the results are so standardized'
that the general pattern works rather'
as a model than a real type.
Still another aspect concerns production,'
constructions built by applying the same standard procedures.'
Quite often, all these aspects exist parallely and overlap.'
Think, for instance, of the infamous Plattenbauten,'
or large paneled system buildings'
of the former East Germany.
Plattenbauten, a type of building consisting'
of large, prefabricated concrete slabs,'
became, after a [inaudible] project in Berlin in the 1930s,'
the standard methods is to build the [inaudible],,'
the new development areas of the country.'
The architects of this kind of social housing--'
we could make, rather say antisocial housing--'
developed subtypes with poetic names'
like P2, WBS 70, or WHH GT 18.
Models that marked, for several decades,'
a general impression of GDR's urban landscapes."
Here you see the material.
And here you see the result. Or here'
again, you know, these extremely standardized places'
in the former German Democratic Republic.'
Here again.
But I ask myself if the destruction of Pruitt-Igoe,'
the famous urban housing project in St. Louis,'
Missouri in the mid-70s--
you remember that Charles Jencks always says postmodernism'
begins with the destruction of these,'
of Pruitt-Igoe cannot be read as a reaction against uniformity'
as well, besides the well-known problems there of poverty,'
crime, and radioactivity and so on.'
Here you have the famous image.
After this first negative example, we can now, of course,'
think of some positive examples.
At least, take for example, the British city of Bath.'
Bath, celebrated as a particularly'
beautiful and picturesque city and the only British city'
recognized as a World Heritage site,'
owes its celebrity partly to the uniformity'
of its material, golden colored local sandstone,'
and to the form of its identical facades.'
The effect of repetition intended by architect John Wod'
was understood as particularly fitting'
for a disposition responding to the roles of classical decorum.'
One could, of course, immediately'
add to these examples those of [inaudible],,'
of many gated communities, or anonymous urbanizations,'
of sprawl scapes, and of many other sites marked'
by an extreme sense of repetition and uniformity.'
Here again, examples of--
whoops.
What about the quality of contemporary sprawlscapes--'
the one which we saw before--
compared, for example, to Olmsted's Riverside?"
What happened between Riverside and our contemporary urban'
landscapes and sprawlscapes?
Let's remark before continuing with the architecture"
that the existence of these patterns'
raises almost immediately some fundamental problems'
of aesthetics, of psychology, and even of ontology.'
Does the work of art has necessarily to be unique'
in order to please?
For Walter Benjamin, for instance,'
the historical situation changed once'
with the Industrial Revolution and the possibility'
to reproduce the same object infinitely once the work of art'
lost its aura.
Erotic objects have a strong identity and individuality,'
while post-erotic object lacks such a quality.'
Or is Kant's right when he affirms that works of art"
touch us by their form rather by content or idea,'
that the form of this building, that it's always"
the form of this building which touches us independently'
of the other factors?
Naturally, I will come back to the sum'
of the idea of standardization and the political impact'
of standardization raised already by Benjamin.'
But there are other examples which'
we can cite when we look for a definition of order.'
Think of, for example, of Ernst Gombrich's The Sense of Order."
Gombrich speaks about an almost anthropological'
or universal need for regularity.'
And he thinks that at the level of our most'
fundamental perceptions, we are always order-oriented.'
But is the role of patterning or responsiveness to pattern,'
really universal or rather the result'
of an order-oriented ideology?
We know that Gombrich borrows his sense of order'
from Karl Popper.
And Karl Popper insists himself on the role of schemata.'
So does this mean that order is simply'
something inborn, is something natural for mankind?'
Or is it, on the contrary, an idea'
of the 18th and 19th century which becomes fundamental'
only in the theories of these people?'
Jay Appleton, for example, adopted this idea'
in landscape studies where he thinks that when'
we recognize a certain pattern of landscape, we--'
it's always recognizability of this landscape"
which makes that, which raises in us positive feeling.'
Is an urban landscape enhanced by uniformity'
or is uniformity the best example of urban beauty?'
There is, of course, another aspect'
which is fundamental in Kantian aesthetics,'
is the sense of autonomy, the autonomy or individuality'
of the work of art.
From the 18th century on, individuality, originality,'
uniqueness becomes a central value.'
And normally we expect now from things that please'
us a high degree of uniqueness.
And the same objects we loved a moment ago become--'
don't please us anymore if they lack"
originality or individuality.
Let's add to this first reflection"
a second layer, introducing two new categories--'
the banal and the ordinary.
Ordinary is something that lacks originality,'
versus the extraordinary where originality immediately'
calls for our attention.
Things that are banal should not be'
confused with ordinary things.
Banal is that which disappears in its context'
without necessarily being ordinary.'
Something ordinary doesn't call for our attention as--"
something ordinary does not call for our attention as well.'
But once we observe it, we remark that it'
is isolated in its context.
The opposite of something banal is, for example, a monument,'
a construction that requires-- as in the case'
of the extraordinary--
our attention.
The French architect August Perret'
was one of the foremost advocates'
of a banal architecture.
For him, the banal was not the ordinary,'
but [non-english speech],, that which seems always having'
already existed.
A banal architecture is one that one doesn't remark,"
an architecture that, at least at the first time, disappears.'
Perret would claim that his Le Havre buildings, with their 6'
and 24 meter scheme, are banal, but never ordinary.'
Another aspect of positive banality in architecture'
is the use of new building methods.'
Le Corbusier, for instance, was proud of using'
a general constructor for his La Tourette monastery'
who just did the job.
It was a constructor who normally built dams'
in the Alps.
So the making of the construction was banal,'
but the result was extraordinary.'
And Le Corbusier, as we know, he really,'
very often liked to affirm that God liked symmetry.'
And we see the trace of this in his urban visions,'
like the [inaudible],, where an extremely standardized,'
with its extremely standardized building types.'
There are still other factors we have'
to think about when trying to define'
the horizon of our inquiry, standardization or homogeneity.'
One essential element is the introduction'
of samples or catalogs, for more or less'
standardized architecture.
The history of this genre from the pattern'
books of the 18th century to the manuals and programs'
of the Beaux-Arts style, to contemporary catalogs'
where you can choose the style of your building'
is still to be written.
There are a few studies about the influence'
of the standardization.
And I think this would be, would be very important to see how'
standardization, both in architecture and in urbanism'
and in other disciplines has really a starting point in many'
of these publications.
Even in this famous photograph of the Beaux-Arts Society'
in New York, we see that the top of the buildings'
is, well, naturally individual.
And it's a skyscraper, as we know,"
but the base is still a very common language.'
We could cite, at the same time, architects who powerfully tried'
to work against standardization like Adolph'
Loos and his famous Villa Moller,'
for instance, where we see that Loos was always extremely'
critical of standardization, of homogeneity,'
both in the eclectic style and in what'
we called the modernists.
And sometimes he went so far that he even'
complicated infinitely the function'
inside his constructions in order to build something'
extremely individual and completely'
against any possible standard, even if some of these solutions'
seemed to not to be logic.
Given that architecture always exists in a context'
and that the main context is that of the city,'
the problem of standardization and uniformity'
can only be treated in the vaster'
framework of the urban fabric.
Even a very brief analysis of the dialectics'
of uniformity versus variety in the urban context'
confronts us immediately with a very complex phenomenon.'
Let's not forget, first of all, that for Virtruvius, uniformity"
was an essential value next to firmitas and all'
the other values, even if his sense of uniformity'
has more to do with symmetry than'
with architectural sameness.
The Vitruvian sense of uniformity'
reminds us, however, of the quintessential category'
of order.
The importance of order comes from the Greek ideal'
of cosmos, that is, the well-ordered universe.'
For the ancient Greek, we live in a perfectly ordered,'
finite totality, built by the first mover or first architect,'
the supreme god if you want.
The seven planets, the seven winds,'
and many other sacred entities, marked always'
by the number of 4, 7, or 10 express'
the harmony of the universe.
That utopic projects of the perfect cities'
of Renaissance, for example, [inaudible]..'
Here you see the four elements, so the four elements'
as general structure or order of the universe.'
These ideas will influence, for example,'
[inaudible] ideal city, and many, many other projects'
of ideal city, ideal cities throughout the Renaissance.'
It is, however, only in the 19th century that order--'
the term order is, of course, polysemic-- becomes'
the key concept of city planning.'
[inaudible] [? haussmann's ?] Paris"
is probably the starting point of an operation'
that still influences the design of many cities'
around the world.
He received the city of Paris, the [inaudible] of City'
of Paris, the body of city of Paris being transformed,'
being destroyed by [? baron ?] [? haussmann, ?] his architects'
and landscape architects and to destroy the old organic Paris'
in order to transform it into something new.'
[? joao ?] [inaudible],, for instance,'
he understood immediately--
maybe he was the most lucid observer'
of this transformation--
and he showed how the old organic Paris, [inaudible],,'
was transformed into something mechanical and marked by order.'
And Baron Haussmann's project at the same time militaristic"
with the boulevards, hygienistic and economical,'
created the cityscape marked by highly uniform [inaudible],,'
standardized boulevards, squares, and so on.'
From the second half of the 19th century on,'
stressing the importance of the visual uniformity of the city'
became a fundamental goal.
The new cityscapes had to be legible.'
And this was not only the case in the center,'
but in the margins as well, as well'
as in the new standardized suburban districts.'
Order and uniformity became, at the same time,'
the condition or, if you want, the synonym, if you want,'
of modern beauty.
The French even invented the professional figure'
of the [inaudible].
[inaudible] from Latin, [inaudible],,'
the controller of the roads.
In 19th century Paris, especially'
in [inaudible] Paris, there was this figure,'
the [inaudible] who had to control, a sort of inspector,'
he had to control the roads and buildings, squares and facades'
that corresponded to a general standard.'
The uniform cityscape, which survives'
in our contemporary urban realities marked, for instance,'
by condominization becomes visible in Fritz Lang's"
Metropolis.
Lang is, by the way, very much aware--'
very much aware of the political implications'
of an urban pattern characterized'
by almost total uniformity.
His deconstruction of a dangerous European utopia'
highlights the contradictions of two conquering systems'
with a strong tendency for uniformity.'
There is, on the one hand, communism and its desire'
to create unique and highly standardized urban patterns.'
We saw the Plattenbauten before.
You have architecture and people standardized.'
And on the other hand, the capitalist system'
with the power for technologies is'
equally interested in standardization,'
primarily not for political, but for economic reasons.'
This is a general background we have'
to keep in mind if we want to remind'
those voices throughout the 20th century that'
called for a critical approach of uniformity, order,'
and homogeneity.
Bruno Zevi, Architectura Organica, Organic Architecture,'
published in 1945, can serve as a first example.'
Zevi, who founded the APAO, Association for Organic'
Architecture, criticized frequently'
the excessive of tautology in contemporary architecture.'
The principal aim of his criticism'
was what he termed fascist architecture.'
Fascist architecture is indifferent to the social needs'
and forgets, quite often, the most elementary functions'
of the building.
It is characterized by symmetry or an excess'
in symmetry, symmetry for the symmetry's sake and proportion."
Most of the buildings Zevi had in mind'
looked like boxes, [inaudible],, statical [inaudible]'
entities with no relation whatever'
to other buildings and the immediate surroundings.'
20 years later, Aldo Rossi published L'architettura della"
citta, the architecture of the city.'
Rossi interprets the city as an architectural totality'
and as a main scene of all human activities,'
he further underlined that cities realize themselves'
thanks to the idea they have of their own development.'
It's a very idealistic idea, a neo-Hegelian idea"
of the city building itself.
Dealing with individuality in the urban context,'
Rossi stresses the essential role'
of monuments versus all other mainly functional'
constructions.
"A monument stands at the center," I quote,'
"it is usually surrounded by buildings'
and becomes a place of attraction.'
Monuments are always individual, highly individual,'
while all the other constructions are not."'
Let's take a source, famous source"
for an advocacy for the individual or non-generic'
in the urban context.
Kenneth Frampton's highly influential paper,"
Towards a Critical Regionalism.
Frampton starts with a citation by the French philosopher Paul'
Ricoeur, worried about the effects of universalization'
civilization giving rise to a mediocre civilization.'
Ricoeur regrets that with, I quote,'
"we find everywhere world the world'
the same bad movie, the same slot machines, the same plastic'
and aluminum atrocities."
And I would add today myself, the same urban landscape,'
the same plazas, the same squares, the same streetscapes,'
and so on.
The contemporary lack of quality in urban form'
is, according to Frampton, in part predetermined'
by the imperatives of production.'
Confronted to the victory over universal civilization'
or what he calls the burolandschaft cityscape,'
we should carefully opt for a variant of regionalism'
being capable to combine the local and the universal,'
the individual and the abstract.
Critical regionalism as a lucid form'
of resistance and culturist strategy'
could be the solution in order to mediate'
between universal civilization and specific, local elements,'
providing a synthesis between world culture,'
diversity, and universal civilization, identity'
imposed by the system.
Frampton calls, on the one hand, for the desconstruction'
of world cultural intended as a catalog of forms'
we have learned to mix, a sort of mixed salad'
architecture or mixed salad urbanism or very eclectic.'
And he invites us, at the same time,'
to face critical universal civilization,'
especially when we rely too heavily, too heavily'
on technology.
Before I come to landscape and landscape architecture,'
let me mention still another relatively recent theory.'
The French philosopher and anthropologist Marc [? auge ?]'
has highlighted during the last two decades'
a phenomenon identified by him as non-lieux, non-places.'
In opposition to places that the spatial entities that oriented'
mankind until very recently on a worldwide basis,'
well-identified places bounded and with a strong identity,'
hypermodernity, he speaks about [french] develops more and more'
highly standardized realities.
If Auge starts like Frampton with a positive model'
of bounded places, he nevertheless'
stresses that even these places are in reality,'
are in reality social and mental constructions.'
Places, lieux, have three main qualities.'
They provide a sense of identity.'
They are relational, that is actively related'
to other places, part of a system.'
And they are historical.
They have a minimum history which confers'
to them a sense of stability.
Non-places, on the other hand, have no identity.'
They are non-relational.
And they exist in a sort of timeless bubble.'
According to Auge, our contemporary civilization'
produces an increasing number of non-places.'
With non-places, he intends two related phenomenon.'
One is a certain type of such places,'
places linked to the transport system-- for example, airports,'
train stations, gas stations--
or to commerce-- shopping malls--'
or to the tourism industry-- hotels and restaurants.'
The other thing which his interest is our attitudes'
towards these places.
When we actually find ourselves in these non-places,'
we never really experience them.
We're never interested in their identity or history."
They have no history or form.
We just use them.
We're simply there, but we could be anywhere else."
It doesn't matter.
Contemporary tourism-- arguably the first the industry'
worldwide--
contributes to the dissemination of even more non-places,'
ex-territorial spots where we don't really"
have any experiences.
The anti-utopic quality of these insular places'
becomes even problematic if we consider the fact'
that most of them are linked to privatization and to security.'
These appear on the happy islands'
of the atmospheric capitalism are in reality'
spaces of total control.
And a culture of control has, as we'
can add, in its turn, a clear influence'
on how these places are planned, built, or landscaped.'
With a final result that [non-english speech]..'
So the non-places create a sense--'
they never create a sense of individual identity'
or relation, but solitude and sameness.'
A counter example, for example, for the non-places'
cited by Marc Auge would be a gas station like our friend'
Nader Tehrani's gas station in Los Angeles or a shopping mall"
or a commercial center like James Wine's BEST."
So we could imagine other ways to define it.'
Let me now go a step further and look for a moment'
to similar phenomena in the field of landscape.'
At first hand, landscapes seems the opposite'
of all these realities characterized'
by standardization, uniformization, sameness.'
Landscape, perceived landscape is by definition'
a place of land, a piece of land or nature seen by someone'
at a certain moment.
It is, in order to use [inaudible] formula,'
time flowing into space.
Landscape is, therefore, always radically singular'
and individual.
It is unique.
It is always this one landscape in front of me.'
The English poet Coleridge who toured the Lake District'
around 1800 and tried to fix the singularity of the landscapes'
perceived was always desperate because of the impossibility'
of finding the right words for his unique impressions.'
I cite, "The Head of Glen Nevish, how'
simple for a painter and in how many words'
and how laboriously and in what dim similitudes'
and how slow and dragging circumlocutions must'
I give it?"
He complains, "Oh, for words to explain'
how slate and limestone lies.
Silly words, I\'m vexed with you."'
Impossibility to tell what is singular'
and given only in a moment.
Dealing with landscape, we can, nevertheless,'
arrive to this opposite finding too.'
Landscape experience is never immediately given,'
but the result of very complex cultural processes.'
We learned, in order to put it differently,'
to identify a series of particular landscape patterns'
and with it so only from the 18th century on.'
Take, for instance, a picturesque.'
In order to recognize it, our ancestors of just two'
and a half centuries ago had really'
to learn its new language.
People like the famous Reverend Gilpin'
actually developed a catalog of landscape patterns.'
And it is in search for these extremely similar landscapes'
that the tourists of the 18th and 19th century travel'
tend to--
had to look out.
See, there was a whole industry of these publications, books'
so picturesque landscape had to be explained in order'
to be seen.
It's not naturally given--
and people naturally to reacted to [inaudible]'
other of Gilpin's publications.
Another instrument used in order to create similarity'
is a Claude glass.
By using it, the traveler has combined the formal identity'
provider by the scopic device with a stylistic identity'
of a well-defined landscape type.'
Here you see Claude glasses in the British Museum,'
Gainsborough using his Claude glass,'
or today's Claude glass, if you want."
This is our contemporary Claude glass.'
So we fabricate landscapes.
And we learn to do this and very recently.'
The reality of the impressions discovered in the world'
out there correspond to a global and highly Eurocentric model.'
That is, landscape painting, of the landscape painting'
of the 17th century, especially the landscape'
paintings of Claude Lorrain.
In reality, the range of pleasing landscapes'
is quite narrow.
And it privileges repetition or the recognition'
of the-- recognition of the similar patterns and aspects.'
We learn to appreciate the bucolic, the romantic,'
the sublime, the wild landscape thanks'
to painters like Claude Lorrain and many others'
of the 17th century.
British travelers, for example, of the 19th century,'
before the 19th century were never'
interested in the British landscape in its individuality.'
They, rather, went to control if the beauty'
of the British landscape corresponded'
to the classic beauty which they knew from the Italian models.'
So, in general, travelers of the 18th and 19th century'
organized their tours by mentally identifying'
and photographing extremely similar--'
photographing in their minds-- extremely similar'
standard landscapes.
The second effect of the aesthetics of nature'
had even more striking consequences.'
The pictuary style applied to gardening and to landscape'
architecture went so far as to produce on site an increasing'
number of landscapes that looked very much the same.'
Worlitz in Germany looked like Ermenonville in France'
or Stourhead in Britain.
And they all looked, more or less,'
like a painting of Claude Lorrain.'
You never know where we are.
So you're picturesque.
At first sight, we think these are very,'
very highly exceptional places, very'
individual with their owners and a nice, very complex programs.'
But if you start to analyze it, you'
see that it's almost the same image coming back"
again and again.
So from Kent and Brown to Repton and Olmsted,'
and up to our days, we're faced with the fact"
that we build landscapes that have to be close,'
that have to be very close to a general model'
in order to please.
My point here is that a certain degree'
of perceptive and cultural standardization'
is characteristic for landscape experience in general'
and that in dealing with uniformity today,'
this has to be waved against this tradition.'
So standardization probably always'
existed in the landscape experience.'
Take, for example, Tuscany, Tuscan landscape.'
Tuscan landscape as we see it and we love it more or less'
today is an invention of the British tourists'
of the 18th century.
Before this kind of trees were not used.'
They were used mostly in cemeteries.'
So this is a standardized landscape.'
But today, it is taking as the topical landscape of Tuscany.'
Naturally, with time, new categories appeared.'
And especially in the 19th century,'
there were many other aspects of standardization.'
I don't have the time to enter this,"
but, for example, the invention of the national landscapes'
in the 19th century--
the French, the German, the Italian--'
they invented their national landscapes.'
And then they tried to keep--
try to make everything possible that the national landscape'
or something identified as the national landscape'
had never to change.
I will come now to landscape architecture'
and to another way to speak about the problem'
of standardization, another way to confront it.'
Naturally, I will try to give you'
some examples concerning standardization in today's"
landscape architecture.
But before coming to, it there is something'
which I always like to mention.
Landscape architecture is a strange discipline.'
It has existed now for 250 years.'
Arguably, it starts with Humphrey Repton, 1789.'
It's the year of the French Revolution too."
And it's his business card with a very pragmatic sense."
Every time he found a client, he immediately gave him'
this business card.
And he calls himself a landscape gardener.'
So let's say our discipline existed now"
for two and a half centuries.
And the strange thing is that landscape architecture'
has almost no history, very difficult'
to find a history, a complete history of landscape'
architecture.
Not very strong in theory either.'
And even the corpus of landscape architecture is not so clear.'
So I had the chance to travel a lot'
around the world with this Swiss landscape architecture'
exhibition.
And I liked always to ask colleagues, to tell me,'
what is your corpus?
I mean, what are 10 works which really count?'
And even most of them stopped at three or if there were--'
colleagues who were in the business, world,'
they would cite their own work.
Well, this is another work.
But it's very difficult.
So I always say, it's a very strange discipline."
Where if we were in--
I don't know painters--
we could agree, there were some people like Van Gogh and Monet.'
And they had some talent.
So we won't start again.
But in landscape architecture, no one'
knows what is the corpus?
What is the standard?
What is-- where do we come from?
So this makes it even difficult to make presentations.'
I mean, what do we speak about?
What is landscape architecture, anyhow?'
So I think it's-- it's something we have to take"
into consideration.
So and maybe-- and this is linked to my topic-- maybe'
this has an effect on homogenization'
and standardization.
Because landscape architecture doesn't have a clear corpus,"
we don't have a progression, take it however"
in what sense you want.
But there is not a clear history.'
So very often, we are dealing with repetition.'
The same forms come back again and again and again and again.'
And we would like to ask some of our colleagues,'
didn't you see that there were some guys like Sorensen"
or some other guys who did some good work?'
So you should look to people who work before you, but no.'
So this is-- I think this is a real problem.'
It's not the problem I want to deal with today,"
but I want to mention it.
So what about difference, individuality,'
and a culture of difference in landscape architecture?'
So my main example I will try to--'
I took one example by our friend Paolo Burgi.'
I think you know his work.
And this is Cardada in Switzerland--'
in the southern part, in the Italian part of Switzerland.'
And I like to show it because I think it's--"
it's a polysemic object.
I don't think we have so many polysemic objects in landscape"
architecture.
So what do I mean by polysemic objects?'
I will try very, very rapidly to give you just an idea of what'
I take as a polysemic object, something'
which is many things at the same time and marked by difference.'
So this is an observatory in the Alps.'
There is a first platform and then'
there is a second platform.
And Burgi built it.
So this is a beautiful platform.
And the starting point for Burgi was'
what happens when you go into the Alps'
and you're confronted to a place where"
you will experience sublime landscape'
and you'll see something extraordinary?"
And his idea was well, we have to do something'
which is not built out, which is not ordinary,'
which is not generic.
He wanted to do something exceptional,'
but at the same time, being full of respect'
for the local elements.
Here you see the context.
It's on Lago Maggiore, not very far from the city of Locarno."
And when he started to work on this object,'
he was very much aware that there is a context.'
It's a Swiss context, too.
You know, Kenneth Clark said this'
is the first painting in European landscape painting'
and maybe in European--
landscape painting all together where you'
can recognize a certain place.
It's a Bay.
It's Lake Geneva.
And you see [inaudible] behind.
And so there is a history behind the discovery'
of Alps in general and of alpine landscape.'
And we have many, many important steps.'
And when Burgi started to work on this project'
to build the platform where you have'
a dialogue with the alpine landscape,'
he knew that the mountains were hated until the 17th century,'
that they were interpreted as the place of the devil'
and of, generally in a completely negative way.'
And only in the 17th century, things started to change.'
And then in the 18th century, they become something sublime.'
This is Caspar Wolf.
And Caspar Wolf made a very important career showing us'
the sublime quality of the Alps.
So when Burgi built his platform,'
he related himself to the history of the sublime'
and to the history of, we could say,'
the modern subject, which like to go to these places'
and to elevate himself and to see'
the world from upside down, which was something almost'
revolutionary.
But, naturally, Burgi worked at this project'
in the 20th century.
And there is a history of the view of our scopic relation'
to the world, which is marked by our desire'
to look from upside down.
And in the 20th century, for example, aerial photography'
became extremely influenced.
This was a photographer and a pilot.'
He pretended that he would both photograph and pilot'
his plane at the same time.
I think it's impossible with his cameras which were barely,"
20 kilogram camera.
But still, he was extremely powerful and influential.'
And so there is a history of our way to see the world'
and to relate our world, to the world through a vision.'
And Burgi creates this platform by relating'
to many, many things.
For example, this is how in the 19th century'
our view from the mountains was organized.'
You see these platforms, these belvederes,'
which was very typical.
Quite strange that already people'
thought that it's necessary when you arrive"
at the top of the mountain to have something,'
further step to go even higher, to have this last step, which'
gives you the ultimate possibility to conquer,'
really, site.
And you see how tourism organized this already'
in the 19th century and how it became'
almost a ridiculous something.
So what is-- if you go to the Alps,'
you will find hundreds and hundreds of these places.'
They're quite sad, very badly built, extremely banal,"
I would say.
And Burgi wanted to make something very different.'
And I think it's really the depths of his knowledge"
which transformed this project into something polysemic.'
For example, he knew very well the tradition of the panorama,'
of panorama.
When Barker invented the panorama quite early'
at Leicester Square, he showed some panoramas'
of the mountains.
He remembered that the panorama, the idea behind'
Barker's project was, there's so many people who cannot afford"
to travel and even if you can afford to travel,'
it's dangerous.
And why use your money for traveling?'
And I will show you the world and you come into the panorama.'
And panoramas became very, very influential.'
And they influenced landscape architecture'
and many, many other disciplines.'
And so people went into the panorama'
and then they could have a 360 degree view of the world.'
So Burgi tries to do something very different.'
That's what he had not in mind, these sad constructions, which"
we find in the Alps.
And he wanted to do something poetic and complex.'
He was beware of the--
almost the responsibility to do what'
happens if we arrive to such a platform.'
How do we look to the world?
And at the same time, he was attacked by some people.'
They said, you're a landscape architect."
You like nature.
And why do you use concrete?
And what about concrete here?
And he said, no problem with concrete.'
I think I can live with it.
And there is a history of concrete.'
And concretes are stone.
And stone is my theme.
Because here we are in an important place'
where two geological phenomena, the African'
and the European plate, comes together.'
You see the same landscape, but actually the mountains'
are very different.
Because one of the-- one mountain range'
is 380 million years old and the other one'
is 120 million years old.
And as the two--
the African and European plate, they touch each other.'
That's why we have so many earthquakes in Italy and so on."
And he tried to explain this by taking some samples of stones.'
And he integrated this into his platform.'
So you'll see it's very-- it's not very rhetoric, rhetorical."
It's very simple.
It works with citation and with other elements'
in order to let us enter into this place.'
And I think was very much aware too about what'
happened in the Alps, and not only in the Alps,'
throughout the world.
So in the 19th century, we destroyed'
or transformed almost all of our traditional landscapes.'
And this is the price, you know.
These are the wonderful five star hotels in the Alps.'
So you could here, as a bourgeois,'
sit there at the old balcony and enter into relation'
with wonderful landscapes.
But that's the price of the transformation, an extremely"
brutal transformation of the alpine reality.'
And it continues.
For example, we have these kinds of platforms and this kind.'
And that's what he didn't have in mind."
And I think the complexity and the scale'
and the almost the poetic quality of his platform'
is really the result of a cultural approach'
of how you project this.
And naturally, he was very much aware'
of the discovery of the mountains and of landscape.'
You remember Petrarch.
Sometimes we read that Petrarch was the first modern man.'
Jacob Burckhardt said this.
And that Petrarch discovered mountains'
when he went to [inaudible].
So the discovery of looking from upside down'
is something very specific.
And it has a history.
It's not given for in every culture and at every moment."
It's a cultural possibility.
And then take the round form, the circular form,'
why did he choose it?
I don't think he had Sorensen in mind,"
but we could think of Sorensen's [inaudible] and"
of [? noguchi ?] and of many other examples.'
I think the round form has something'
which we'd call agorotic.
It's like a forum.
And therefore, to build his observatory in this way is--'
there are many, many, it's like a poetics"
of citation and suggestions.
So I create something that looks very, very simple,'
but it's not simple at all.
And another idea behind Cardada was--'
well, this is something which seems only to float, floating.'
And the idea floating, you know, in Rem Koolhaas'
it's so important.
And the idea of architecture, this starts already with'
[? burle ?] and many other people,'
[? ledoux ?] in the 18th century,'
architecture as an elevation and the desire to almost float'
above the world.
And then the relation to stones and to rocks'
and the aesthetics of rocks.
This is, by the way, a painting.
It's not a photography.
So I think he had a very keen sense of,'
what do I want to keep and how do I want to work?'
And there are many other stories and many other [inaudible] too.'
I'm sure many of you know Paolo Burgi's Cardada."
So they're iconic signs integrated."
And they have something to with history and time,'
especially philosophy of time, the very long geological time,'
hundreds of millions of years, our time,'
and the time when you come as a visitor and you stop by.'
Or this is Monte Verita, very important place'
in around 1900 where artists, anarchists'
from everywhere to Europe came to this place in Ascona.'
And they developed modern dance and poetry and art'
and et cetera.
And it is not very far away from Cardada either.'
So all these themes come together in Cardada.'
And at that place, he built a fountain.'
And this fountain, you see, he wanted to build himself.'
And here you see the fountain.
And that's how he choose it.
So that's the history of this fountain."
And that's, again, the making of the fountain."
And that's making of the fountain again."
And then it will be installed there.'
So it's something very individual, very particular."
And he spent a lot of time to find'
the right place and the right--
the right material.
So it's something completely individual."
And later it was destroyed and so he rebuilt it another place.'
And one of the starting points of my idea'
to speak about standardization was that Paolo is working now'
in Geneva at the CERN.
And he works on--
there is a tram here.
And so it's an urban project.
And here you see the plan.
And he wanted to build a bench here.'
And he told me, it's impossible.
I cannot build my bench.
So he wanted to draw a bench like he'
drew the fountain before.
And he said, it's impossible.
Because they asked me to do benches,'
to buy benches in a catalog.
And he said, it's not only about standardization, so,"
but it's about certification.
He said, if you don't have the right certification,"
then you cannot go on.
And so he had to--
so he couldn't do it.
And it's these kind of benches he had to choose."
So they told him, if you want to have a bench,'
we'll give you a catalog.
And it's almost impossible for him to design it,"
even in Switzerland.
You know, in Switzerland, we're not"
even in a European community.
So we're a very free country and we're very proud of being free."
But it doesn't work anymore for many reasons--"
certification, standardization, economic reasons.'
So this was--
I think this is a good example of what'
I mean by standardization and the impossibility of being'
original.
Then another example, a contemporary example'
is square in Milan, Piazza Gae Aulenti, quite recent.'
And Piazza Gae Aulenti is, for me,'
an example of a really, very, a sort of international style'
in landscape architecture or in urban design.'
It was quite a poor quality.
And you see we are here in Milan.'
But we could be very easily in Berlin too on Potsdamer Platz.'
And by the way, the Italian journal'
said, oh, Milan is becoming now like Berlin.'
So they said, finally Milan became like Berlin.'
So you see how something which maybe for some people'
is something extremely negative, on the contrary,'
it was celebrated as well.
We too, we have these new urban plazas which are wonderful.'
And you see here.
And if you look to it, it could be everywhere.'
So it's a sort of Dubaization of Milan."
And this Dubaization, you can find it everywhere.'
You see, it's horrible.
I mean, it's a sort of urban nightmare."
And people even celebrate it.
They think, wow, it's full of--
and you see no life here, eh?
So they celebrate it, but still, there are some problems.'
And then, again, Piazza Gae Aulenti.'
And you see-- no, let's go back here."
You see the solar tree.
But this solar tree is really something terrible.'
I mean, it should be forbidden.
And it's not [inaudible] [? stephens' ?] revolutionary"
solar tree of 1925, you know, which'
was really a scandal, which is something poetic, and which'
is a provocation, and which is many things together.'
No, it's really these kinds of horrible solar trees."
They should forbid it.
I mean, they're a tree.
We still have trees.
So why solar trees anyhow?
And so you see the standardization in solar trees.'
So that's how Piazza Gae Aulenti works."
Or, for example, I was in September in Morocco.'
And another standardization, you see the whole lighting system.'
You see in the whole country, the same lighting system'
everywhere.
So you see the same lamps everywhere.'
Probably it's a wonderful business for the one guy"
who does this in the whole country.'
But for the whole country as a totality,'
it's an extreme standardization.
And so we go towards poor solutions.'
Or this is a wonderful and completely ironic'
faux palm tree.
So now the telephone companies, they hide their antennas'
with palm trees.
And you find it everywhere, hundreds or even thousands'
of these things.
So this, again, is standardization.'
So we have in landscape architecture and urbanism,'
generally standardization is so powerful.'
And we have to ask ourselves, where does this come from?'
Why are we confronted with this?
Naturally, there are standards.
And more and more standards become important.'
And we have in the US, you have these standards.'
But I think it's more--
the whole situation is more complex, far more complex.'
It's linked to globalization too and to some corporations."
Take, for example, if we look to the important, really'
important international architecture firms, et cetera.'
Or do you think SOM is very proud of this?'
I mean, this very--
this is the main example for what they do, huh?'
And probably, I think they're really happy about this."
But it could be, you know, this [inaudible]'
could be everywhere.
Or if you take AECOM, you see again, it's a plaza."
It could be everywhere too, very difficult to say where we are.'
Or here again, you see where are we?'
And why do all these places look the same?'
So maybe before coming to really the final remarks,'
how can we interpret landscape architecture?'
And how can we interpret the urban reality all together?'
So as you heard, I deal sometimes,'
I still deal with literature and comparative literature,'
even if I'm mostly now in landscape architecture"
and related disciplines.
But I will make a short detour by literary theory.'
Because I think what interests me is, who is responsible?'
Who is responsible for standardization?'
Who is responsible for standardization'
in architecture?
Who is responsible for standardization'
in landscape architecture?
Who is responsible in general?
And I think we need to identify someone who is responsible,'
at least to start to think about how to understand the world.'
So if you take literary theory, very, very quickly,'
in the 18th and 19th century, everything'
was about the author.
So we had the figure which was the author.'
And the author was always someone'
who was the author in the very enthusiastic sense.'
So think of the parks of the 18th and 19th centuries.'
They're full of these sculptures of Edgar Allan Poe and Pushkin"
and Tolstoy.
So it's the author.
And what does the author--
well, the author, he writes something.'
It's a text and a novel, for instance, or a poem."
And so the author, there is a causality between the two.'
The author writes a poem.
A composer composes music, and so on.'
So the author is responsible for something.'
So there is an author.
And we can take him for responsible.'
But at the same time, hermeneutics'
in the 18th and 19th century said no.'
Everything which, Every discourse'
is a result, not only of an author, but of a system.'
Take, for example, poetry.
Well, when you write a poem, you choose a sonnet.'
And the sonnet doesn't belong to you,"
but it belongs to literature.
And it belongs to a system of literature.'
And in the system of literature, you'
have the system of language, and so on.'
So every discourse is both a result of an author'
and the result of a system at the same time.'
And then Kant comes in the 18th century.'
And he says, there is something which we could call'
the autonomy of works of art.
Once a work of art exists, it doesn't belong to anyone."
Once the architect finishes his building, it's a building."
And it exists like a poem.
And it's-- well, he goes on to do other stuff."
And so it's autonomous.
And you have to interpret it on its own basis.'
And this is the autonomy.
Very important idea comes back in the new criticism where'
they say, don't rely on the author,"
don't rely on the system, rely on the discourse itself."
And so the author is something you have to be careful of.'
The author, anyhow, we don't know anything"
about the intentions of the author.'
And an author is someone who is living.'
It's far too complex to speak about intentions."
And but there is autonomy.
And the system, sometimes you have'
to be careful with the system too.'
And then, in the 20th century, we have structuralism.'
And what do I mean by structuralism?'
Well, if you want to understand the discourse,'
you have to understand it on its own terms.'
So it's what we call reflexivity."
It means that every object which we produce, especially'
in culture, has to be interpreted on its own basis.'
So every novel is the implicit theory of itself.'
And every building, important building'
has an implicit theory of itself.'
And this is structuralism.
It means in order to understand that the discourse,'
you have to understand its structure.'
And this became quite important with the Russian formalists'
and many, many other people.
And then came post-structuralism.'
And they said, the author doesn't exist."
We think that there are people which we call authors, someone'
who wrote the book, but it's never"
the author who writes a book, but it's"
the system which writes books.
Because the system is something which--'
you find it in [inaudible] and in many people--'
they say there is a general system of literature'
and of the language.
And it's much stronger as an author."
You think you're the author, but you're not the author."
You think you're the author, but there's so many constraints"
that you're not author.
And then so the actor disappears almost.'
And then in the 20th century, Umberto Eco and [? wolfgang ?]'
[inaudible] and many other people'
said, well, there is someone who is lacking here.'
It's the reader.
And there needs to be someone, the spectator.'
And so now, finally, we have a theory'
where we take all these things together.'
So why do I speak about this?
Because I think it's an interesting analogy."
Because we can ask ourselves--
ourself, what happens when we're confronted to standardization?"
What happens when we deal with a work of landscape architecture?'
Who is the author?
And how strong is the author?
And naturally, we can go from a weak author'
to a very strong author.
Sometimes we have strong authorship, even in urbanism.'
Think of Niemeyer and Lucio Costa'
when they designed Brasilia.
It's strong authorship.
And in many other cases, the author almost disappears.'
And then we have the system which can be very weak'
or it can be very strong.
And then the reader.
Well, the reader or the spectator'
is normally extremely weak.
There is a tradition of architecture and, I would say,'
of planning generally that the consumer, the user'
doesn't really count.
I mean, we're still in a tradition"
of architecture and planning generally as production.'
And we're very happy when the production is solid"
and when it's well done.
And once we finish it, once we finish a building,'
once we finish a square, once we finish a project, well,'
we go on to the next one.
So we're never interested in a real life or what [? jane ?]"
[? dixon ?] calls the afterlife.
But we're just in the logic of production."
And [inaudible] the reader or the user'
is always the poor guy in this triangle.'
And we have to ask ourselves, if we're"
dealing with standardization and homogeneity, well,'
where does it come from?
Does it come from the system?
Does it come from the author?
What happens or is there happening--'
what happens here?
So I think this model is a very simple model.'
And it's an extreme simplification of many things"
which became extremely complex in literary theory'
in the 20th century.
But it's-- I find it an interesting analogy in order"
to ask, who is responsible for all this, for standardization?'
Who's responsible for the quality and the non-quality"
or the lack of quality of today's spaces?"
Who's really responsible?
And, well, I'm afraid that all these things will become"
a little more complicated with what I called here the BIM uber'
Alles or the super BIM or the hyper BIM.'
You know that now we go from BIM to LIM.'
And landscape information modeling is somewhere there.'
And I think things may become worse and more problematic.'
And I was three weeks ago in a strange place,'
College Station in Texas.
But the good surprise, besides the fact that many students'
were armed, so it was a bit surprising for me,'
even if in Switzerland, we can buy arms very easily.'
But there my colleagues told me, be'
careful what you say because many of our students'
come with their Smith & Wesson.
So I was-- but I went to their lab.'
And I saw the biggest BIM cave of the world, so 120 degrees.'
And Julian Kang is building now 360 degree--'
no 300 degree BIM cave.
And naturally, it's really fascinating."
And there is a story behind BIM linked to standards.'
But in a perspective of cultural history,'
well, I was amazed concerning what happens here.'
Because it's somehow, it's almost"
a promise to replace the world.
I think it's both a very old history and something very new."
Probably we're still in the Brunelleschian invention"
of modern space.
And this is 16th century.
How people imagined that we can rationalize the idea'
of the great or what the Italians call'
the [non-english speech],, so how we can rationalize the size,'
the view of the world.
So I think the BIM and the BIM cave'
are representations of a way to see the world which'
was born in Europe in the 15th century'
and starts with Brunelleschi and many other people.'
And then it became this link between technology and vision.'
And one of the examples is natural landscape.'
I think the landscape view comes from here'
and from the 15th century.
So this is a BIM cave.
And here you see the grid.
And it's used in the--
back in the 17th century.
But the BIM cave or the hyper BIM'
we'll have in two or three years, well,"
it has to do something with the panorama too.'
Because this is the panorama in Leicester Square,'
Barker's panorama.
And the promise to see the world and these were these panoramas,'
you went to Leicester Square and you'
could see Paris or Jerusalem or any other town'
or any other reality.
And the new BIM, well, it's really"
the promise of a full of possibility'
to enter another world, which is our world.'
And this will mean that for planners and landscape'
architects and architects, it's even easier"
not to have any real contact with the world out there.'
And it becomes even a reality.
This is in Estonia where people are'
very proud that this was done with the last BIM technology.'
But at the same time, you see it's panorama."
So how-- and it's naturally a shopping center."
So how all these things come together--'
standardization, BIM, and so on.
And, of course, the thing which comes in mind'
is Plato's cave because the BIM cave is a cave."
And well, you remember that Plato'
argues that we'd never see the world,"
but we actually see only shadows.'
And so I ask myself, what do we see?'
What kind of perception, what is the influence'
of all this new technology on perception?'
And do we see the world or do we see only shadows?'
So probably the things I'm most interested now is,"
how do all these technologies transform'
our perception of the world?
And I think that's where we have to start when"
we deal with these phenomena.
Thanks for your attention.
[applause]
Thank you Michael for that incredibly generous talk.'
And I want to turn directly over to the audience.'
I know Michael's very happy to receive your questions, so."
Please.
Thanks.
I was wondering about standardization in the past.'
And I think that, for example, in like a medieval European'
town as well as in Haussmannian Paris,'
or something there is always standardization.'
So within that, like Siena, for example, all of the buildings'
will be built using the same tectonic logic.'
And I think it's true around the world in a way."
So now that the zone of awareness for the people'
is global due to communication technology,'
is there any-- do you really think'
there's any way to stop standardization"
without stopping communication?
Well, two observations, first, you spoke about Siena?'
Yeah, well, Siena is interesting because I'
don't think it's standardized.
If you look to the good government,'
you know, the painting 1350, you will see that this'
is a portrait of the city.
And the city portraits itself, very interestingly.'
And all the houses are different.'
And there is a sense of difference,'
and I would even say a sort of pride in difference.'
So the reality of the European city in the 14th century'
is identity through difference and by difference.'
And you have poor house-- you have'
some houses which are very rich people and some are'
poorer people.
And it's almost programmatically about variety in Siena"
And it's quite late, I think it's really"
in the 18th and 19th century that the idea of uniformity'
comes up and that it enters the urban space.'
So I think it's extremely recent and probably"
linked to some ideologies.
And your second observation, can we stop standardization,'
can we avoid standardization?
I don't know.
I try to understand what happens.'
So I think I'm interested at first in analysis"
and try to see, what are the phenomena we're confronted?"
And it's not easy because all these values--"
that's one of the ideas I tried to express--"
is that all these oppositions are extremely ideological.'
So and especially when we deal with landscape, so'
our landscape patterns and what we'
define as beautiful landscapes are always very much influenced'
by ideology.
For example, people don't like to hear about this,"
but 20th century landscape architecture,'
there is a history, a very important history'
linked to ideology and especially'
to far right ideology.
Take, for example, [inaudible] [? hamburg's ?] famous"
[inaudible],, his book where he speaks about the good'
that the bad landscape.
And you see that a certain idea of organic landscape'
can be interpreted very easily as the ideological idea'
of some philosophers of the 19th and 20th century.'
So I don't think we're--
I think it's far too dangerous to think we are against,"
we're for standardization, we have to stop it,"
we don't have to stop it.
I'm interested in saying, well, we are confronted to it."
And let's understand what happens."
And let's see, in some cases, we may react against it."
And in some cases, it may be OK too.'
So I don't think it's far too--
maybe we can do some intelligent criticism'
once we understand the phenomenon'
in its full complexity.
But we're not there.
And so it's the same with BIM.
So I went to this laboratory because I'
was interested in the critical impact of BIM.'
So I work now on a project, how digital perception transforms'
our interpretation of the world, and especially in studios.'
So we have a project ongoing where we go into the studios--'
architecture studios, urbanists, landscape architects.'
And I'm interested how drones, programs, satellites,"
everything, Google Maps, take everything together,'
how the digital transforms the perception,'
so that actually people see the world differently.'
And so I'm interested in these phenomena"
before trying to judge it to say I'm against it or for it."
Yeah, thank you so much.
I'm really interested in the term generic as you use it"
and maybe to expand your, as Ed said, very generous lecture.'
Many of the examples you used to define landscape architecture'
seemed to either put it in a position of framing landscape'
or viewing landscape or more contemporary examples,'
you're looking at items, objects, hard materials that"
almost sit on or seem to almost decorate the landscape.'
Whereas myself as a landscape architect,'
I think generatively of landscape'
as moving earth and planting materials and hydrology'
and the very stuff of the planet, if you will,'
and not the stuff that sits on top of the planet.'
So I wonder if you might be able to talk'
about the generic vis-a-vis landscape'
architects in this missing canon, which I couldn't agree"
more with you about, such as [? browers ?] in Holland'
or Capability Brown in England or Olmsted'
in the United States, whereby land itself was the design'
medium.
So the generic in landscape architecture, in the history'
of landscape architecture?
Yeah, vis-a-vis moving land, moving and be--'
and inhabiting the actual cultural landscape as opposed'
to the view of an existing landscape or the positioning'
of the viewer in terms of contemporary landscape,'
which your examples used--
viewing platforms, solar trees, and vulgarities'
of patterns, which I couldn't agree more."
However, it's maybe not the stuff"
of the very landscape itself.
Well, the first idea which comes to mind'
is that in the 18th century, 18th and 19th century, well,'
you have all these people who move earth as you say already.'
Take Repton or Morel.
Morel, who, by the way, an engineer of the [inaudible]..'
And he became the first French landscape architect'
around 1800.
But the result they had in mind was almost always'
something extremely generic.
You remember when the [inaudible]'
says if as a landscape architect you'
want to work, you have to create a tableau, a painting.'
And it's a sort of complete immobility."
And it has to be recognizable, because it'
has to correspond in some way to patterns'
which you know from painting.
So actually what they created were living paintings.'
And they used all the machinery and shrubs and trees'
and everything.
But the result had to be static.
So there is a contradiction there'
because the Anglo-Chinese garden,'
or picturesque garden starts with the philosophy'
of moving around and freely creating the reality'
where you walk.
But at the same time, the ultimate sense'
of a picturesque garden, it was the recognizability.'
So the possibility to, as you said, to frame it'
and to freeze it.
And if you didn't have frozen landscapes, that is, paintings,"
living paintings, then your garden had no sense.'
So I think that's one of the ways"
that standardization worked back in the 18th'
and then in the 19th century.
In contemporary, well, contemporary landscape'
architecture is more difficult because,'
as you said, what do we speak about?'
So we should start to have a corpus.'
And who does landscape architecture?'
And who are the authors?
And what is-- there is a field where landscapers and urbanists'
and planners-- well, who is the one who transforms the world?'
So what happens in these places?
But I think another thing I'm interested in--"
I don't answer, but still--
another thing I'm interested in--"
or I answered only half--
is the history, the influence of software in the last 20 years'
on the form, the Gestalt of architecture'
and of landscape architecture.
So what happens, how strongly did'
software and the recent software really'
create certain realities?
What happened there?
And so what I would be interested'
in is, how does everything which is digital actually'
create the reality on the ground?'
And with BIM, it's fascinating because, naturally, we"
can say it goes really from the screen'
to the machine to the 3-D printers and everything'
and to the production.
So I think we go one step further.'
Because now-- while in the 18th and 19th century'
the result was 2D, it was a nice picture,'
it was a beautiful picture-- now it's 3D."
So you go from 2D to 3D.
Yeah?
Perhaps this is more another thought on what you presented,'
particularly on the last--
on that little diagram that you are talking about--'
the system, the forces, the publics.'
And I'm wondering if in the present context, if it makes"
sense to rethink about the forces'
that are producing this generic.
Because exactly these landscapes that you're looking at,"
beyond the form and the effects, they'
are the result of certain capital demands,'
issues of marketing, issues of creating a certain image.'
So I'm wondering if you have further thoughts on expanding"
the conversation about the systems and the constituencies,'
the stakeholders that are generating'
these images of landscape or perhaps if this'
could be a good moment to bring, to unpack what system may mean.'
Yeah.
Yeah, probably the sort of systemic approach,'
so going back to what we call the system would'
be important because, as we all understand,'
author and authorship becomes weaker and weaker.'
And the reader or spectator becomes weaker and weaker.'
And the one reality which becomes almost overwhelming'
is the system.
But if we start with--
we have to define what we-- when we talk about the system today,'
it's very different than what the structuralists"
and the post-structuralists defined the system back'
in the end of the 20th century.
So probably, is digital system, for example, a possibility,'
to say that we have a sort of auto-referential digital system'
which has become so powerful that it doesn't need us"
at the moment.
So even we as designers will disappear forever.'
And the system will design the world without any need of us.'
And this would be a sort of totalitarian system'
which produces--
even our desire will be controlled by it.'
So I think this is probably one of the directions one'
has to inquire.
But I wouldn't have a system theory, a ready-made system"
theory which I could cite in order to apply it.'
But certainly, yeah, maybe if you think about system--'
in hermeneutics, the system was the language.'
So because probably the inventors of hermeneutics'
thought that the language is the most general way'
to define all the discourses.
And language brings us back to rhetorics.'
So probably, there is a sort of rhetorics of the system which'
is extremely powerful today.
And the rhetorics would be a sort'
of non-written conglomerate of implicit rules'
which actually shape the world.
So I would-- one of the directions I would look'
into is a return of rhetorics.
So that's one of the ideas I would have."
But I don't have any other answers."
Yeah.
Yeah, thanks for your extremely generous lecture.'
It was really fascinating.
And Q&A sessions is great too.
My question relates, I think, to how'
you concluded the lecture, which in my experience,'
the conclusion that you provided seemed a little,'
a little depressing in a way.
And I'm wondering if that was your intent"
or if you think that digital technologies, BIM specifically,'
could perhaps usher in a new age of, say, even'
returning to Brunelleschi and his model of the Florencian'
dome and using the model and not the two dimensional drawing'
as the means to generate architecture or landscape'
architecture.
Whereas now, you know, you make your fancy Revit model,'
but you still produce a two dimensional drawing.'
You still hand that to a construction team.'
You are still-- you still have that two dimensional to three'
dimensional abstraction.
Whereas, potentially with augmented reality,'
you could just live in the model and design in the three'
dimensional and build in the three dimensional.'
Is that a positive development?
Would you see a return towards non-standardization'
through the ability of the craftsman to potentially'
have more influence on what's being built,"
more use of local materials, et cetera, because you're not"
abstracting to the two dimensional,'
but producing a document set?
I don't know.
Yeah, well, first of all, I didn't want to depress you."
And I don't want to sound like an old professor."
You know, already Plato, you remember'
he said, oh, now all these people start to read.'
It's the end of culture.
It's horrible.
Because before everything was oral.'
And everyone had an incredible memory.'
And now all these young people, they are all--'
all these hipsters, they read.
So it's horrible.
It's always the end of culture for--"
so I don't-- I'm not interested in a sort of straightforward"
criticism of our tools.
I think it's like people are crying about internet"
and everything becomes poorer.
I don't think so.
We have to use it in intelligent ways.'
So this is clear.
And that's why the link with Brunelleschi, probably"
there is something very Brunelleschian and extremely'
intelligent in these technologies.'
But still, they are an interpretation of the world.'
They're not the reality.
So it's a very, very powerful tradition."
And many people like Benyovszky, et cetera'
have said probably the strength the extreme power'
of the Brunelleschi model, in order to simplify,'
is because it's an extreme simplification of the world."
If the world becomes mathematical and geometrical,'
if I can control it, I have a rational model.'
And it's so powerful because it becomes universal"
because it's so powerful, but it's not"
the true model, et cetera.
So when you speak about the local and craftsmanship'
and other things, I can speak only'
about the quality I saw in many landscape architecture studios.'
And probably, this is something very real, I would say.'
And even as students, what I say to my students,'
you have to be at the same time extremely rapid and extremely'
slow.
And to be extremely rapid means you'
have to use all the devices which you have today.'
And you have to be the strongest one when you use them.'
So you have to know everything and to use everything possible.'
But at the same time, you have to close your eyes'
and you have to take your time.
And to take your time means to, probably you'
have wonderful ways to use all these technologies of today.'
But maybe the next day you go back to drawing,'
something which you draw.
And I think many examples show us'
that probably the compromise between slow and fast,'
technological and something which you do,'
but I believe a lot in the intelligence of the hand.'
And because I think it's not only about what you draw"
and what you do with your hands, but it's about time."
You take your time.
And when you take your time, it means'
you reflect, so your reflection.
And I think there is a distance.
And when you have a distance, well, then you'
look differently to what you produce.'
And the danger of everything linked to machines,'
to the digital is that you don't have the distance anymore."
And so probably, we have to be, at the same time,'
organic and mechanic and fast and slow,'
but certainly not depressed.
Festina lente, make haste slowly.'
Will you all join me in thanking Michael Jakob'
for this beautiful lecture?
[applause]
Thanks.
