Good evening.
Hi, everybody.
I'm Diane Davis.
I'm the chair of the Department of Urban Planning and Design"
here at the Graduate School of Design.'
And it is my honor and extreme pleasure'
to be able to introduce Professor Kees Christiaanse'
tonight, who will be speaking on the subject of inversion'
and subtraction in urban design.
His keynote is a capstone event, the capstone event,'
of a conference organized by our doctor of design students'
today, structured around the theme of urban form,'
and counting on the participation of some'
of today's leading architectural theorists, landscape"
architects, planners, urban designers,'
and geographers of built form.
And they're here in the audience,"
and I hope you'll get a chance to chat with them"
after the presentation.
Kees is doing double duty for us tonight'
as he has already shared his reflections and thoughts'
this afternoon on recent urban transformations,'
has filtered through his own deep knowledge'
and professional practice over the last 30 plus years.'
And so we're so thankful that he has also"
agreed to give us a special lecture tonight.'
It would be banal, even if somewhat true,'
to say that Kees Christiaanse needs no introduction,'
particularly to those of us here at Harvard's Graduate"
School of Design.
He is, after all, one of the influential scholars'
and practitioners of urbanism today.'
But as a chair of a department that'
houses two programs, urban planning and urban design,'
it is especially important and meaningful to me,'
personally, to be able to introduce Kees,'
because he has built his sterling reputation not just'
around his many important built projects, teaching,'
and scholarly publications, but also'
through his own active engagement with both'
the fields of urban planning and urban design.'
In his very persona, and of course,'
with his built works and writings,'
he has embodied the creative tensions inherent in any effort'
to synergize the insights, sensitivities,'
and skills of these two separate, but intertwined,'
disciplines.
The achievement of this synthesis'
is considered by many to be one of the holy grails'
of the design disciplines.
One way that Kees has advanced this synthesis in his projects'
and writings is by developing new action paradigms'
and alternative conceptual frameworks'
for guiding interventions in the built environment.'
He is known, for example, as someone'
who thinks about the role that buildings and neighborhoods'
play as "socializing machines."
And given my own background in sociology,'
this concept, and his own longstanding commitment'
to paying attention to the experiential dimensions'
of urban design projects, all reveal'
a remarkable, transdisciplinary intellectual breadth.'
Likewise, commentators have observed'
that much of his built work shows'
the influence of urban planners and social activists,'
like Jane Jacobs.
And I might similarly note that in this afternoon's discussion"
of new trends in urban design and city'
building, Kees eloquently framed his views on the limits'
and possibilities of good urban design in today's world"
as being hamstrung by individualizing'
cultural orientations and transformed'
political practices, both of which'
have emerged with a vengeance, in the context'
of neoliberalism-induced declining state'
efforts to actively discipline market actors'
and forces in the service of the public good.'
With that type of grounded political, economic approach'
to understanding the barriers to creating'
equitable and inclusive urban conditions in today's world,"
I would say that Kees speaks not just to urban designers,'
but to all of us who have faith that the design professions are'
central to creating more sustainable,'
just, and human urban environments.'
Before I turn the microphone over to Kees,'
let me just give you a brief.
And it can't be too, too brief, but an overview"
of his extraordinary career so far.'
Kees Christiaanse studied architecture and urban planning'
at TU Delft.
In 1980, he joined the Office for Metropolitan Architecture,'
OMA, and was appointed a partner in 1983.'
In 1989, he founded his own company,'
now called KCAP Architects and Planners in Rotterdam.'
In these firms, Kees focused much of his work'
on urban assignments in complex situations'
and on how to guide urban processes.'
And he's an expert in the development of university"
campuses and in the revitalization'
of former industrial railway and harbor areas,'
as well as a supervisor through those works'
of several international urban developments.'
Throughout his career, Kees has always'
combined teaching and research with his professional work,'
generating fruitful cross-fertilization in frames'
of thinking and modes of action.
From 1996 until 2003, he held a professorship'
for architecture and urban planning'
at the Technical University of Berlin.'
And from 2013 to 2018 has been chair of the Urban Planning'
Institute of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology--'
is that time-- yeah, that time is correct--'
just until 2018 in Zurich.
And since 2010, he has been involved in the Future Cities'
Laboratory in Singapore.
In 2013, he was appointed chairperson'
of the External Advisory Board of the Architecture and Design'
Department of Singapore University of Technology'
and Design.
Kees is also author of multiple books and essays'
about architecture and urban planning,'
and they include The City as a Resource:'
Concepts and Methods for Urban Design, The Noise Landscape:'
A Spatial Exploration of Airports and Cities, The Potato'
Plan Collection: 40 Cities Through the Lens of Patrick'
Abercrombie, and City as Loft: Adaptive Reuse as a Resource'
for Sustainable Urban Development.'
He was a curator of the Fourth International'
Biennale in Rotterdam in 2009.
Just last year, he was awarded the ARC17 Oeuvre'
Award in recognition of his influences in the field,'
and just recently was announced as a speaker for the World'
Architecture Festival, or was in 2018.'
There's probably a lot more that I missed,"
but I think we are going to let his words'
and his work speak for themselves'
in the rest of the evening.
And so without further ado, let me introduce Kees Christiaanse.'
[applause]
That was too much honor.
I'm very honored to be here.
Thank you very much.
And I would call myself a rather pragmatic practitioner'
teaching urban design.
I retired a month ago from ATR, and we had a big party,'
and I released two books.
The one is the textbook on the left-hand side'
with some nice sketches.
And the right hand is the Potato Plant Collection'
that Diane mentioned, with 40 Patrick Abercrombie'
maps of world series made by different architecture schools.'
I am a child of not of the 68-ers,'
but I'm a child of the 67-ers, which"
are the Provos in Amsterdam, who were a little bit older than me'
and who were much more playful, and maybe also'
productive, constructive in the sense of urban'
than the Paris 1968 people.
The Provo movement was also rather coming forward'
out of a relation with the flux movement in New York,'
instead of having a very strong link to Paris.'
This guy here is Luud Schimmelpenninck.'
He was the head Provo, so to say,'
and they organized protests, performances,'
political rallies.
But moreover, or very importantly,'
they produced projects.
One of the projects, they were always wearing white Wrangler'
suits, as you can see, and one of the projects'
were the white plans.
They had the white housing plan, which'
led to the squatter movement and which'
led to me being a squatter for 10 years.'
They had the white bicycle plan, which you see here.'
They had the white car plan, and another number of white plans.'
The white bicycle plan consisted of a very modern idea.'
Namely, we take a thousand white bikes.'
We sprayed them all white, and we distributed across the city'
without locking them.
And all the people in the city can use them, share them,'
and just put them back when they don't need them anymore."
This, of course, was in the pre-digital age'
and, therefore, the bicycles were thrown into the canals.'
They were repossessed and locked,'
or they were demolished.
And it's interesting that now we have the means"
to deal with that.
He was also-- left in the car, he'
is, with a famous photo model of that time and the prototype'
of the white car.
This was a very revolutionary thing'
because there was this shared electric car, which'
you could be a member of.
There were eight stations in the center of Amsterdam.'
You see down below one of the stations.'
Of course, they had very heavy batteries'
that took 24 hours to charge, or something like that.'
So it went all a little bit slow.'
And both the bicycles and these electric cars'
ended up, in the morning, at the central station.'
And then they had to organize trucks'
to redistribute them because otherwise, the system didn't"
work.
Here, you see, below right, you see Luud Schimmelpenninck'
today, and he is still having a consulting'
firm on urban mobility.
He develops menus and apps and systems.'
And one of his systems is car2go,'
which is a electric car sharing thing.'
And on the top, you see the Zero bike, which you all know,'
which are also thrown in the canal in the meantime.'
These white plans were developed, more or less,'
at the same time when Yoko and Jong came to the Hilton Hotel'
in Rotterdam for their "Bed Peace" performance.'
They did that because of the provos,'
and they got a bike also.
Their concept was also to be dressed in white,'
to be in white sheets, and to talk about peaceful things'
and receive people that all had to be doing something in white.'
And they had an intensive relationship.'
Even the queen passed by in white clothes.'
I don't have a picture out of that."
I think Luud Schimmelpenninck was'
instrumental for this culture of sharing devices'
within urban mobility.
He was really a pioneer.
And it has led, like I said before, to all kinds of systems'
that we benefit from now today, which are extremely useful'
and which also prevent things like stealing'
and demolishment, et cetera.
I worked from 1980 at OMA.
That means we founded OMA.
OMA was consisting of two couples in London.'
There's [inaudible] and the cool houses."
And on the moment that the leaders in New York'
arrived in the Netherlands, Rem got a question'
to do three projects.
Then he asked his students to set up the office,'
to let it look like an office.
And so we hired a place and then OMA started.'
We had a lot of trouble, but in the end,'
it became very successful, as you know.'
And in the end, everybody who is not Rem has to leave,'
which is good.
This project was called [inaudible] in Amsterdam North.'
It was one of the first port conversion areas.'
In the top part, you see more.
And it was in the times of heavy residents participation'
and political left wing regime in the city of Amsterdam.'
It was a period when the investors had nothing'
to say at all, and that meant that the whole development was'
kind of geared by the residents of the dock workers that'
were living there, whose dock was going to be converted.'
And therefore, there are 1,372 social houses.'
There's only social housing, some schools, some community"
centers.
And one type is row house, which you can see,'
which we designed in such a way that every bedroom could look'
across his garden to the water.
And the front part was urban villas.'
Actually, the urban villages were'
selected after they rejected that we wanted to build towers.'
This is the very A1 site in Amsterdam.'
So this would be Battery Park in New York, as a comparison.'
And it's still incomprehensible that it was built,"
and it's even more incomprehensible"
that it is still there and not replaced'
by some kind of large environment.'
The urban villas were transferred to the Netherlands'
from Berlin, because we knew Oswald Mathias Ungers very'
well, who, on the right-hand side,'
made a lot of very interesting sketches'
for urban villas in Berlin.
And on the left hand is his famous Roosevelt Island'
competition entry, with also a kind of mini tower villa.'
Of course, the Germans in Berlin were extremely romantic.'
They weren't always on holiday in Italy."
And of course, the urban villa is, more or less,'
an Italian product in the kind of environment'
of density than a German product,'
and not at all a Dutch product.
But this project triggered the introduction of the urban villa'
in the Netherlands.
Before, it didn't exist at all, and transformed into a kind"
of low cost housing.
And the advantage was, of course,'
that it is kind of an oriented object.'
People feel identified.
Most people have two corners or three corners to look around.'
They have a few people on one access point,'
et cetera, et cetera.
So 12 years later, we designed the GWL area'
to form a water works plant, where'
we created a scheme with urban villas, of which all the house'
doors had to be on the ground, preferably.'
If that was not possible, there should'
be another interesting access system.'
And all the apartments had a garden.'
That means the ground floor had to have a direct garden'
on their living room.
The top floor had a roof garden.
And the sandwich houses in apartments in between,'
they had an allotment, which you can see here.'
And this created an enormous amount of eyes'
on the street and accessibility, which makes this neighborhood'
still the most socially safe and vandalismless place'
of all housing neighborhoods in Amsterdam.'
I had contact with Jane Jacobs at that time.'
This is in 1991.
I was very impressed by her.
You all know her so I don't go very much more into it."
But she wrote a very funny book, Economy of Cities,'
which you may have seen.
It's more like a narrative, and it"
says that the city came first and then agriculture, instead'
of the reverse.
It's a very beautiful story.
This whole way of thinking led, in 2009,'
to me curating the Biennale of Architecture in Rotterdam.'
And we called it Open City.
Also, at the same time, Richard Sennett'
had his article and some lecturing going on.'
A lot of ideas converted into this idea'
of Open City, which, actually, was also an idea of the 1967'
Provo movements that were also linked to people like Herman'
Hertzberger and Frank van Klingeren,'
which were structuralist architects that already worked'
on such ideas in the 1950s.
And for us, Open City was mainly that you created conditions'
for coexistence by creating urban structures that were not'
blocking an exchange between people,'
but fostering exchange between people.'
So this is the forum of that exhibition.'
You see there a big chess piece of metal, Vriesendorp.'
And you see here a parametrically developed'
urban globe, and some other things,'
which was, more or less, a replica of the Meerpaal'
in Dronten, which was the only building in the Netherlands'
that became a superstar because of famous television'
Christmas held there.
It consisted of a box by Frank van Klingeren,'
and it contained a theater, the council hall, market,'
sports fields, and everything was-- a school,'
a supermarket-- and everything was not separated acoustically.'
Everything was one in one space.
That was his idea of the Open Society.'
There were also a lot of links to pauper, in that sense.'
Of course, it didn't function.
So if you go there now, it's still a nice building,"
but everything is closed off and has petition walls.'
In those times, we developed the idea of doing design'
as simultaneous chess.
So simultaneous chess means that you do not take all those work'
streams-- like infantilization, analysis, vision, development--'
linear, past each other, but you switch them parallel,'
like in the red colored part of the diagram.'
And then, by doing that, you trigger the creative moment'
and you get shortcuts and associations, sheer by the fact'
that you switch certain investigations'
and certain process streams parallel to each other,'
instead of linear.
And you do that both at the technical level,'
as well as on the stakeholder level, as on the design level.'
And we process that into our projects.'
One of these projects was the Mullerpier'
in Rotterdam, which was a harbor pier, in which we'
did the urban design.
And we started the urban design together'
with a couple of architects.
And in the end, the urban design was,'
more or less, not arbitrary, but kind'
of a composition of typologies that were developed,'
and then put on the model, and then shifted to each other'
by different architects.
And the reason was that we thought'
that a kind of idiosyncratic form of architectural buildings'
would connect to the culture, or to the presence of harbor'
cranes and other scale-breaking elements,'
along the river of the maritime technology.'
And this led, among others, to a kind of architectural sculpture'
reality and an urbanistic way of working with buildings'
and public space that we called flip-flop, in which you are not'
in a perimeter block situation, where you have streets carved'
out of blocks.
You are also not on a chess board, where'
the buildings are objects.
But it oscillates in between.
Of course, our process backfired a lot.'
So during the crisis, these two building plots'
were not constructed, and they were immediately occupied'
by the residents, turned into playgrounds,'
and into allotments, and I don't know what."
And of course, we could only be agreeing with that.'
In the meantime, there has been a paradigm shift--'
now we talk about 10, 15 years later--'
in housing.
And housing is increasingly personalized'
as a commodity, but also architects still have'
some influence in the Netherlands,'
also as a kind of culture, and due to the fact'
that our building industry is very rationalized.'
In the meantime, with the help, also, of digital technology,'
we can develop row houses, or brownstones, or townhouses,'
if you like, that have different access systems'
and different configurations for the same building'
costs as formerly a block with one architect and one'
contractor would do it for.
That's a very interesting and optimistic condition."
And here, you see the last block that we finally'
negotiated with the people to give the land back.'
Of course, in favor of something, as'
under construction.
So I am also not familiar with the phenomenon'
of starchitecture.
Or we also do not work as iconic architects, being a man of war,'
but we are more like a fleet that'
coordinates their movements in between each other,'
and the stakeholders are also part of the fleet.'
Of course, in a social democratic market economy,'
this may lead to something like this.'
It is the kind of extreme condensation'
of individual initiative within an institutional framework.'
And you can criticize it or not.
I think it has some very beautiful features about it.'
Of course, this democracy also leads'
to what we call railway accidents, which'
means that traffic infrastructures are built.'
Then because of the traffic infrastructure,'
old country roads have to be removed.'
Then roundabouts have to be introduced.'
Then the roundabout has to have a piece of art'
because the local council prescribes it.'
Then the piece of art is being designed by an artist.'
And another artist designs this sound protection walls'
that are completely in contrast to what this other artist'
makes.
And the result is a complete cadavre exquis,'
or let's say not exquis, a kind of very bad combination"
of all kinds of elements that are, let's say,"
the bad side of this kind of condition.'
We worked, as I said, a lot in former harbor areas'
and in renovation sites.
And we produced three books, City as Loft, State Build'
State, and Urban Loopholes.
City as Loft is about the creative and cultural'
activities on former brownstone and harboursides.'
State beyond state describes Shenzhen'
as a city where the real city centers are neither'
the villages, neither the city center,'
but the former industrial plants that have been transformed.'
And Urban Loopholes describes the parallel reciprocal'
influence of the settling of creative industries'
in the French concession in Shanghai,'
and the upcoming heritage consciousness'
with the authorities.
This is, for instance, a type of site where we work on,'
a former port, shipyard.
And above is about 1970, and now today, it's what you see below."
And it is a kind of rich palette.'
And the interesting thing of today'
is that these are really incubators of a changing'
economy and of a changing socioeconomic relationship.'
Because were these areas former, either invaded by developers'
and then changed into something exclusive,'
or they were occupied by people like us'
and turned into squats, artist's studios, and temporary uses."
Today, there is a fusion going on'
between these low-budget, high-culture and high-culture,'
low-budget, if you like.
So on the left-hand side, you see'
one of the holes, which is turned into a city where'
different people, mainly artists, can build'
their own workshop and studio.
And on the right-hand side, you see a low-cost Hilton hotel.'
Doubletree is a series of Hilton hotel,'
which practices a kind of mimicry'
towards the surroundings, and which is heavily visited hotel'
for a startup firms that started, like left up,'
and then consequently became successful.'
And so you have, also, the sometimes a little bit'
disagreeable situation, that the neighbor is still'
having social money, social benefit'
money, and the other neighbor has become a millionaire.'
But this is quite interesting.
So we did a lot of these kinds of project.'
This is another one where we renovated warehouses.'
And the developer first wanted us'
to make expensive penthouses and lawyer's offices, and so on."
And we convinced them that we should'
make a combination of social housing, of artist work,'
and of, also, expensive stuff.
And the result is that we have, in the plinth of one'
of the buildings, a restaurant Fifteen,'
which is a series founded by Jamie'
Oliver, in which ex-delinquent criminal youth are serving'
the managers of the holdings that'
are having their office in the new architecture.'
And of course, the architecture is related, in that sense,'
to this cultural form of harbor and shipyards,'
and therefore, also, we have built in these rusty fleck,'
these rusty spots, in it.
This phenomenon of low-budget, high-culture, high-budget,'
low-culture--
which now is fused, which becomes a complimentary,'
a very interesting force, which is also'
connected to the new atomizing economy of small firms'
that is appearing in cities--
is becoming really mainstream.
And it is the artist of the urban design to work with that'
and to take care that it is going'
a little bit in the right direction.'
This is the railway station area in Zurich on the other side'
of the tracks that we designed.
It looks like a stupid office concept,'
but it is, I think, in terms of public space,'
it's quite unique and strong.
And it consists of a podium area,'
and then you are allowed to do some towers on top.'
Connects to all the streets in the surrounding.'
And here, this is one of the projects where'
we do so-called subtraction techniques, which are not'
really very special because you fellas already'
did it for New York.
We do not create urban design guidelines from zero to up,'
but we go from a big mass down.
We create a big mass and then we subtract the public space,'
the shadow and sunlight rules, and the few lines'
that we want to see, and certain, also, form aspects'
that we would like to see.
And then you have a framework in which developers architects'
can make their buildings.
And this works very well.
We did that in Rotterdam.
And you see the result that's already--"
that was the first project, in that sense, we did.'
And this is one of the buildings in Switzerland.'
Of course, these buildings are a little more'
conservative and retro than in the Netherlands.'
But what is super interesting is that its an enormous mix of'
uses.
And one of the developer buildings'
was invaded by Cosmos, and Cosmos'
is the most well-known fringe cultural institution,'
or foundation, in Zurich, that decided,'
sheer by the spot and this basis,'
to settle itself in this building,'
with its cinemas, bookshop, cafes, restroom, et cetera.'
And now it is a kind of hot spot for the people'
who protested against this project.'
It's the most popular place for the people who"
protest against this project as a wrong capitalist development'
by the Swiss Railway real estate company.'
And to everybody's surprise, Google rented something"
like half of the buildings.
Everything that is blue was suddenly rented by Google,'
and Google is kind of transforming'
the architecture of our friends who build there'
into more spaces like on the right, relating to public space'
and creating a dedicated condition.'
Of course, they have a security problem now.'
And this is very, very difficult to bring into harmony'
with their original concept of openness.'
But still, it's much better than this kind"
of total hermetic stuff, which is also transcending'
into the apps and the operating system'
in your phone, which allows nothing'
else but the company that is housed'
in this car-friendly building.
In the meantime, we're working on more"
of those spots in Zurich, also.
And it's very unique that the rest"
of the available land that is still in Zurich'
is allocated to industry.
Why?
Because there is an enormous demand of apartments.'
It's like in Manhattan.
But still, the city has decided all the municipality'
land that is still left is reserved for industry.'
Why?
Because the city says a city cannot consist only out'
of residence, and certainly not out of only university'
residents and bankers.
The city should also have a vital component of industry.'
It should also not have only services'
because you need something that need to be serviced.'
And so this is going to be industry, these former railway'
areas.
And of course, they are going to be boosted and have'
multiple laps and production facilities.'
It's the introduction of vertical,"
of flatted production in Europe.
It Happens both in Hamburg and in Zurich,'
which didn't happen before.
You see just realized a building, the Noer,'
where you can buy--
they produce these ugly bags that all architecture students'
wear, Freitag, these clumsy things that are produced there.'
But they are a very interesting startup firm that'
really meets these criteria.
And it produces an enormous spin-off'
in the form of social environment.'
Now, we work also on this phenomenon in Hamburg.'
In the north of the river, you see the HafenCity,'
which is, more or less, the most famous waterfront'
project on the continent in Europe,'
which we made a master plan in 1999 after competition.'
But in the meantime, the HafenCity'
is due to its success.
And it's the vision by the people who manage it,"
not necessarily me or us expanding.'
And one of the expenses is the jump'
across the river, which you see where the stadium is.'
This is a project that didn't go ahead."
We made a design for the city for the Olympic games,'
but it was canceled by a referendum.'
And as a stakeholder manager and simultaneous chess person,'
you must take that very sportly.
But basically, like in the Olympic legacy project'
in London that we did, this project'
was firstly geared to create a quality new urban district.'
And secondly, then, the question was'
how to accommodate the Olympic games in it and not vise versa.'
And in this area, very interestingly,'
on the south side, there are still port activity.'
And the idea is to introduce, or to integrate,'
port activity into residential neighborhoods,'
the pre-work for sound and emission insulation legislation'
has been made.
And these typologies are really a little bit taken from Asia,'
also from Singapore, where they have, of course, due'
to the space problem, flooded factories.'
But flooded factories now are emerging in Europe, not only'
because of the space problem-- because in the periphery'
there's often a lot of space-- but because of the high end"
development of the enterprises that'
are there that have urban and well-educated workers that'
do not produce emissions and sound,'
and therefore want to be in the city, and therefore'
they have to go vertical.
So it's a kind of crucial moment, at least"
in middle Europe, and also a little bit in Amsterdam,'
how this production aspect is going to evolve'
in these kind of environments.
Another example is the railway station area of Eindhoven'
in the Netherlands.
So the top part is the existing situation'
and the south part is the future master plan that we made.'
And again, it doesn't consist of traditional perimeter blocks,"
which you may think, but it consists of, let's say,"
atomized new economy with working and residential towers'
on top.
Eindhoven has a genius development,'
economic development.
It was very in crisis.
Why?
Because Phillips, the big multinational electronic'
company from the Netherlands, originally'
decided, in the wake of the globalization,'
to put its headquarters in Amsterdam.'
And Eindhoven didn't want it.
And then they made a deal that Philips'
gives away a lot of their buildings for free to the city.'
And it gives away all it's not used patents, which is"
an enormous amount of patents.
And these patents are allowed to be used by any startup'
firm that has the condition to settle in the city of Eindhoven'
preferably.
In one of the old Phillips factories that you see here,'
this creates an enormous boom.
These are, by the way, by the Rem Koolhaas' grandfather,"
who was also an architect, Mr. Roosevelt, Rosenburg.'
And in it, you have the well-known co-working spaces,'
of course, which is very efficient.'
This is the co-work space in Shanghai, where our office is.'
We would never want to go out of such a space, because you have'
more benefit than disadvantages, also, when'
you have certain personnel.
And what is obviously also the case is'
that in these kind of areas where we work,'
this is in Zurich, where we also work on the master plan.'
And these are two projects by Gramazio Kohler Robotics'
and the ITA, the Institute for Building Technology.'
They did not make the obligatory competition'
and started to make buildings, but they formed a group'
and handed in a research proposal to make a building.'
Because the building is going to be a research instrument'
during the time of its life and, therefore,'
we use, also, buildings as a research instruments,'
as experiment, instead of just making buildings.'
So I think this trend is going on all across the world.'
This is the Create Campus of the Future Cities Lab of ETH,'
but also MIT, TU Munich, Yale are all grouped together'
to create a kind of critical mass,'
also with certain startup activities.'
And you see also that you can find it beautiful,'
or less beautiful.
I find it not so beautiful because I'
lost the competition for this.
But it is a space that is working very well'
as intermediate ideas and kind of producing space'
in these conditions.
We do a research on the moment in Future Cities, which'
is called the Grand Projet, the big project, or mega project.'
And we research eight projects La De France in Paris,'
King's Cross in London, @22 in Barcelona,"
HafenCity in Hamburg, Kowloon Station in Hong Kong,'
[inaudible] in Shanghai, and Tokyo Station in Tokyo,'
Marunouchi.
And we didn't find a suitable US project."
And during this research, the competition was written out'
for the new innovation district on the high speed railway'
terminal in Singapore, which is this one, which competition--'
oh, sorry--
which competition we won.
And we brought further--
I say we never invent something.
We never do an innovation.
What is innovation in our work is taking urban types and kind'
of bring them a step further, or develop them further.'
In Singapore, there's a kind of culture going on"
of buildings, high rises, on podia, where mostly shopping'
malls are in, and so on.
And then there are towers on top,'
which contain offices, or residential buildings,'
or hotels.
And in between, there are skyguard.'
And so for this area, which had the maximum height'
of 135 meters due to some air corridors,'
we decided that we didn't want to do"
a kind of ridiculous dwarfed skyline of Dubai, which'
most of the offices in the competition did.'
But we made obligatory to make all the buildings flat roof,'
134 meters high with a maximum surface'
and an obligation to create roof terraces.'
Then we also created a podium level,'
which would be permeable, and which would not so much contain'
these shopping malls, but would primarily also contain'
university campuses, or production, flatted production,'
or research, and of course, also, other kinds of amenities.'
There's a new kind of test rule, which"
is called the 100% green replacement rule, which'
means that every footprint of a new building that you make,'
you have to recreate the footprint and surface in green'
somewhere else on the building.
And this is not only looking nice green,'
but it's water absorbing, helping to cool,"
and I don't know what.
And so we did that and we comprised the--'
sorry-- we comprised the footprint'
of the whole neighborhood by freeing up the high speed'
railway corridor that you see in the middle,'
as this sinusoid part and the shell as the station'
hall, which was also saving the project about three months ago'
because the high speed station line was canceled by Malaysia.'
And then they have a phasing problem,'
and we created this project in such a way'
that it can incrementally phase, independent of the traffic'
and public space infrastructure, public transport'
infrastructure.
So you see here this kind of comprised footprint,'
very dense, but on the other hand,'
it leaves an enormous amount of green space open,'
and the streets are very, very closed.'
It is part of a corridor system that we helped'
develop, the local authorities.
They are changing from a central area as the center'
to a polycentric condition where Jurong Lake District-- that'
is our district-- woodlands and dampeners near the airport'
are being new centers.
The one connecting to the high speed railway'
line, the second connecting to Malaysia, and the third'
with the airport.
And then there are certain accents'
of corridor, functional corridors, around them.'
The brown one is the knowledge corridors,'
where, also, our universities and the NUS and NTU'
are already there.
You see a couple of these corridors.'
They vary from very traditional campuses,'
too much screen and no public orientation,'
to have succeeded projects by Zaha Hadid to C sar Pelli,'
creating a kind of strange amalgamation of colonial'
architecture and Americanism.
But let's say it's going to be interesting,"
and you see an image of the roofs'
of these podia of this new neighborhood, or district.'
It's about 3 and 1/2 million square meters."
It is based, like I said, not on an innovation by us,'
but it is created out of a gradual genealogy'
of building new building types that is specifically'
emerging in Singapore.
And this is the way the podia look.'
These podia, like I said, permeable.'
There is a hole.
Here we used quite some big data server in order'
to create the conditions for natural ventilation'
against air conditioning in the building blocks.'
And so this is a typical test layout'
with patios and gangways, which may have something like this'
to see, in which, like I said, entrepreneurial activity,'
educational, and research activity'
exists next to commercial activity.'
So the project is approved and is now fixed'
and they are already doing the ground works.'
And in the meantime, they have an agreement'
about the high speed railway line.'
Another little bit of a mega project but also not,'
that's why I show it.
Also tied to this, we're making, in the city,"
is the Seun project that we do in Seoul.'
You see on the left-hand side is two kilometers long building.'
It's quite famous.
It is, in the meantime, rebaptized making city.'
There are a lot of new economy activities there.'
And we have worked on a competition for the right area,'
which is an area that is completely'
atomized into small plots, coming from the original plot'
division, and owned by 60 owners.'
So this is the kind of work that you see,'
but also there are very low profile things happening.'
And this is the next project that is going to be done.'
And people in the city, as well as'
the 60 owners of all these sheds,'
they want to prevent that these kind of Samsung buildings,'
like you see there, are going to dominate the city.'
Actually, the whole of Seoul is being'
Samsungized by these kind of giant blocks and is, of course,'
not so very nice.
So we made quite a radical proposal,'
which, amazingly, was accepted, by turning'
these alleys of the original plots'
into a pedestrian access system for the new building'
configuration.
And they also had a zoning law with height limitations'
because there's a tomb there of some kings,"
and other limitations, that made the building'
necessary to slope, or to cut off, or to tear us.'
This is the famous river that was freed from the highway'
viaduct that maybe you all know, something like 15 years ago,'
and has become one of the major public spaces in Seoul.'
And on the left hand, you see the area'
that we are planning now.
And on the left, you see the original fabric.'
Then you see the current fabric.
And then you see what we try to preserve,'
and we cannot preserve the plots.'
But we preserve kind of imagining of the plots'
in the form of stepped roof terraces'
in the different building elements that are'
between this pedestrian space.
And we are commissioned by the 60 owners,'
so this is not a repossession project, where a big developer'
kind of skims the whole thing.
But this is a project that is commissioned'
by the 60 proprietors of these different sets'
in the middle slides.
So it's highly unique.
So if you go to the second image top on the left,'
that's the condition that it has now."
And normally, you would go to the left, clear everything,'
and then you would go down and put in a couple of Samsung'
volumes on top of it.
But what we do is going to the right'
and, let's say, make a kind of scale interpretation,"
and use certain reminiscence structures for the urban design'
and also for the architecture.
So this is the result. It consists'
of something like 10 buildings, and they will all'
be elaborated by architects.
We do also one of the buildings.
It steps down towards the tomb.
It has multiple terraces.
And it has three layers, which is only'
viable in Asia, ground floor layer, an intermediate layer,'
and a top layer, where there are also public activities.'
And the ground floor layer is very interesting'
because it also is called memory ground.'
There's a lot of archaeological stuff underneath the soil,"
underneath these sheds.
And we open them up and [inaudible],,'
and so it will be partly a museum'
where you go through the ground floor.'
And we orient the space and the articulation'
of the scale and the elements to the alleys'
that are now in that area.
And of course, funny enough, like the Meerpaal in Dronten,'
this is, of course, a little bit also coming forward'
out of my history with the Herman Hertzberger'
and Aldo van Eyck in the TU Delft in the 1970s, which,'
of course, worked very much with this scaling in a very'
structuralist way.
This is the famous Central Beheer'
project by Herman Hertzberger.
So what about the landscape?
This is the landscape in the Netherlands.'
It's called Oostvaardersplassen, and it is an area"
that is inside a polder.
So it should be parceled completely rectangular,'
in the sense that Vittorio said this afternoon.'
But it didn't manage because the civil engineers could not"
get the so-called [inaudible] water out.'
It is water that goes under the dike'
and then penetrates into the polder.'
So it was, more or less, lost, and it turned'
into a natural reservation.
It was appointed a national reservation,'
and in the meantime, you can say that it'
is the only prehistoric landscape in the Netherlands,'
which is only 50 years old, which is a nice paradox.'
And on top of that, konic horses were'
set out there, which is a hybrid of the top horse'
from the Eastern Europe plains and the aurochs, but not'
a real one.
A kind of re-hybrid version of different wild cows'
were set out in this area, and the horses,'
they were very successful.
They grew and their herd was split into 2 and 1/2.'
The herd was transported to Poland, to the east of Poland,'
and set out in their original habitat.'
So it's a kind of nature engineering, which"
I think is interesting, in relation'
to the discussions about the Anthropocene, which you also'
addressed this afternoon.
We have, as Dutchman who have been grown up'
in artificial conditions, we have the approach'
that due to the fact that it is too late, that the planet is'
already on its way to be destroyed,'
we have to be also active in designing evolution.'
Well, that was a little bit over the top.'
We also made the two urban extensions'
on the sides of this area, where they'
manage to dry up the polder.
And then we said to the mayor of this city,'
oh, mayor, we do not believe that you get your,'
I don't know, 5,000 or 7,000 housing units"
there with all the amenities.
It will never happen.
So we made a design that consists'
of a spine in the middle, along with the first construction'
and the amenities.
And then on the right-hand side, we'
created an extension of this water area,'
or this wetland area.
And on the left-hand side, we created Forest Park.'
And so the trick was that you were allowed'
to build the spine, and after you had built the spine,'
only on the basis to a certain degree of demand'
you were allowed to invade the forests with dwellings'
or invade the water with islands we build for them.'
And this is one of the projects that we'
call inversion in urban design.
We do not take a side.
And then we start to design something nice on it.'
From the volume of the program that we get,'
we look at how the program fits onto a site.'
We say, let's look at the site, then"
make a diagnose about the qualities,'
then consolidate what we think are the qualities.'
Consequently, we tell the authorities'
how much we think that such a site can have.'
So it's a kind of inverse approach"
of protecting an area, more than just let it go.'
Of course, this is only possible in certain planning conditions.'
And as I was, at that time, also appointed'
as the chief planner of Schiphol Airport, Amsterdam Airport,'
we also worked on the master plan in Schiphol'
from that perspective, which led to an enormous resonance,'
also, at other airports.
And then we decided to make a resource in a book'
called The Noise Landscape, where'
we looked at different airport urbanization conditions, which'
was nice for me because in the 1980s, when I was still at OMA,'
I made this collage.
You see David [inaudible] on the left-hand--'
you can see his eyes--
in a farmer costume.
And you see he has an American Express card,'
and he earns so much money with his farm next to the airport'
that he can fly to Concorde.
You see all the production on the horizon.'
You see that he doesn't have a farm,"
but he has more like a Renaissance castle'
and a Renaissance garden.
In this garden are not flowers, but his products'
as an exhibition.
You see him with his father, showing a model of his farm'
in Nairobi, where the roses are growing better.'
You see that they are genetically experimenting.'
And you see that they have guest workers'
in the underground infrastructure helping them'
to produce their products, which are then in the Harlem'
which is seven meters below sea level, in which Amsterdam'
Airport lies, being shipped to the airport.'
And I can tell you, the reality is not very different'
as this caricature that I made in 1987 for an exhibition.'
This is the Schiphol area, and you'
see it's a beautiful landscape.
And the motorway and the railway land in an island by tunnels.'
And so the revolving landing strips are, of course,'
because of the very many wind directions,'
the planes can freely move around this node.'
And you see the original polar structure,'
let's say the subdivision for agricultural use"
from the 19th century, very nicely,'
and also some of the farm strips.'
So one of the acknowledgments that they'
made as master planners was always'
a fight between the city of Amsterdam and the airport,'
or the other surrounding areas.
And until we made this drawing with the consequent diagrams--'
this drawing shows the emission of sound contours.'
And here, you see what, in our exaggerated vision,'
would have happened when the airport would not'
have been there.
So on the left hand, you see the airport and its sound contour,'
which leaves a lot of space open and leaves Amsterdam'
free from Haarlem and from Hoofddorp'
and Liden and other cities.
And on the right hand, you see what'
probably might have happened when the airport would not'
have been there.
And so we convinced both the direction of the airport,'
as well as the city government of the surrounding'
municipalities, that you should consider the airport as a park'
landscape and that you should be glad'
that you have these nice contours, because it creates'
a hard edge for the city and it does not'
lead to a sprawled condition.
And so you see here, this is a student project'
that we did on the left, which creates'
this park out of the airport.
And you see here that the airport park, which'
is the second from the left, is about the same'
as other natural reservations around the city of Amsterdam.'
And so in the wake of that, we also'
tendered out park projects that were kind'
of consolidating this notion.
So this is the so-called sound part'
by H&S Landscape Architects, which'
is a [inaudible] landscape that has that distributes the noise'
and, at the same time, is a very attractive park for leisure.'
Of course, also for spotters that'
like to look at airplanes because probably'
half of the population doesn't mind to live"
around airplane ports at all.
One of the features in many airports'
that we researched and we talked to was also the golf course.'
We made a golf course in Schiphol between the Amsterdam'
forest on the south, on the lower part of the slide,'
and the landscape around the airport.'
And the golf course is not simply a golf course.'
If you go to Incheon, Incheon is an enormous airport,'
which has two golf courses, boat racing things, dentist clinics,'
et cetera.
They have the problem that they are so far from the cities,'
and they have gained so much land from the sea,'
that the airport is almost vanishing'
in the middle of nowhere and they are forced'
to produce new functions.
And the golf courses that are around airports'
are initially golf courses that were given to a golf club'
because the land was not valuable at all.'
But now, Incheon, for instance, exploits the two golf courses.'
Schiphol Airport exploits the golf courses'
because they have noticed that the golf course is'
a vital economic engine for entrepreneurial shape'
and aviation in the airport urbanization'
area, which, of course, is it's kind of a brilliant idea."
These are birch trees planted by Adriaan Geuze from West 8'
Architects that are specially breeded birch trees that have'
weak, venerable branches so that birds cannot sit on them.'
So as soon as a bird sits on a branch, it flips down.'
So it's a landscape device that tries"
to prevent to have too many birds in the airport that'
then do not land into the engine of the plane.'
And here, you see a installation in which'
we are recycling de-icing liquid with the help of algae.'
There is a department called The Grounds, founded'
in Schiphol Airport, that works on sustainable complementary'
technologies to make the airport more sound.'
And of course, we have all these enormous boxes'
in and around the airport.
That's the flower auction in one of the biggest buildings"
in the Netherlands.
And we are now trying to see how, with the different owners'
and entrepreneurs, we can use these roofs for multiple use,'
specifically, also, for these secondary economic activities'
around the airport.
And the last project, in that sense, that I show you'
is a railway station in Montpellier in France.'
This is the Mediterranean.
This is city center of Montpellier.'
And here, you see the site, the neighborhood,'
of the new railway station, which, of course, shouldn't be,"
but in France, they just deliberately let the TGV lines'
past the cities and sometimes put a station'
in between cities.
You see the TGV line that is going to be there.'
And here, you see the existing motorway.'
This is a bypass motorway.
It becomes the nice separation of a landscape corridor'
between the city and the villages'
around the lagoon and the airport.'
It's completely threatening to be destroyed,"
and we were selected because we did,'
let's say, a kind of inverse approach,"
which, finally, they swallowed.
So this line is being built, and it's my fault"
that this line is there.
So I have, by drawing this, destroyed'
the landscape on the one hand.
But on the other hand, this would be only the railway,'
and there would be another one for the highway.'
And we managed to put them together.'
It needed seven months and, finally,'
sitting at the desk of the Ministry'
of Transport, Minister of Transport in Paris,'
to lay them cold against each other, by which we could create'
a railway square across that immediately could connect'
this area and this.
Then we decided that everything that'
was wetlands or stream and creek and vineyard, and so on,'
was going to be protected.
And the end is a green framework.'
The result is a green framework.
So first, we have reduced the infrastructure bundle.'
Secondly, we have made intelligent crossings for them.'
We have neutralized the sound problem.'
We have preserved the qualities of the landscape.'
And then the residual areas are--'
this is an example of the station.'
Of course, there has been a competition in the station'
not so nice as we thought.
These neighborhoods, they can be built,'
but they can also not be built. That doesn't really matter."
We have a framework in which in different orders'
of development incrementally.
One can fill it up to a certain degree of relationship'
between the built and the unbuilt.'
And so we always say nowadays, after this project,'
urban design is like skiing.
It's the art of breaking elegantly."
And the instruments that you have for breaking'
are different administrative law.'
Also, the first law in Switzerland, for instance,'
is an enormous problem for some cities.'
They also have a so-called disaster food service law,'
which means that they have to have'
a minimum agricultural service per resident in the country'
in order to feed self-sufficiently'
in times of crisis.
And so you have an enormous amount'
of these kind of breaking factors, if you like,'
that make urban design like skiing.'
And this is a list I showed this afternoon.'
I think that is a very interesting list to look at it.'
Because I can now say that inverse landscape urbanism'
is something new, but it's nothing new at all."
It was already in Cities in Evolution by Patrick Geddes.'
And Rem Koolhaas showed nothing, that his countryside is now'
the label for landscape urbanism,'
because there are something like 40 concepts'
and ideas before him.
The idea of being an urbanist, an urban designer,'
is not to be a unique inventor of ideas.'
You are a cog wheel in a mechanism,'
and you have to find out where you have'
where you can have impact and where not.'
Thank you very much.
[applause]
Stay up here.
I think we have time for about 13 minutes of questions,'
or something like that.
So if you want to stay up here.
Questions?
Anybody have a question?
We'll have a microphone going around."
Please.
Hi.
Good evening.
Thank you for your talk.
I want to go back to the maybe one unarchitecture slide'
you showed of the fleet versus the one ship.'
Oh yeah.
And how you think of your work and working together.'
And I noticed what you focused on a lot'
in this talk were sites that were rather large'
and you could work a lot in them one.'
The one that seemed very unique was where the owners were more'
your client and not the big developers,'
but you seem to always work and push--'
as you said, develop-- the idea beyond kind'
of at all what people think is possible at the outset.'
My question is, in the future, do'
you think that there is enough land right now that'
are these kinds of defunct sites on city edges'
and coastlines to redevelop into something'
that could accommodate the amount of housing and urban'
and built environment that we're going to need in the future?"
Or do you think it's a place where"
you need to look to other smaller forms,'
more atomized, more spread apart maybe?'
And I'll leave it at that vague question mark."
That's almost impossible to answer that question,"
but let's say I can say something about it."
The fleet merely is an organization system,'
in which I have installed both in the university'
as in our office, in which I immediately give away'
the finances and the men and the company management to somebody'
else so that I can work on the content.'
And this person is fully responsible.'
I don't even know what the turnover of the office is."
I have no idea.
I have a salary, and when there's a profit,"
I get something of the profit.
I also have, since two years, atomized'
the property of the office.
So I only still have something like 12% ownership'
in my office.
It appears that people get more motivated when'
they are co-owners, and we have a good mechanism'
that people who are not really functioning after a while'
can also fade out again.
It's very important to create a complimentary team"
and that you create a condition in which'
this complimentary team can then, let's say, subdivide,"
if you like.
And I think this is a very important requirement'
because the urban design process in a city like Amsterdam,'
or even in Singapore, works in that way.'
You have multiple people who all have a very independent say'
and you have to bring into harmony'
their different interests, or you have to at least go on'
with the project.
The 60 clients in Korea, they have organized themselves'
in a certain way like that by delegating the project'
management to a company.
And this company has to, let's say, every time produce"
a presentation of the design the costs'
the functional differences in the program,'
et cetera, to the 60 owners.
So they are not individuals, but they'
are grouped into a kind of collective,'
and the collective has a management'
body that communicates with us and the municipality.'
And now, about urban development, let's say,"
I think there are two models of urbanization'
beyond the countryside.
The first is the compact city.
And of course, you can see that even mega cities in developing'
countries, they are partly extremely unsustainable,'
but at the same time, they have a very low takeoff footprint.'
And in general, for all cities, you'
can say that agglomeration leads to a better condition.'
Also an economic sense.
If you read the book Arrival Cities,'
you know that after two or three generations,'
people from the cities in the slums already'
mostly have emancipated into official society.'
And then the second--
I always say in terms of concentration,'
and attraction of concentration, and settling of forces,'
and so on, the large city is, more or less, on autopilot.'
Of course, we have to govern them.'
We have to improve them.
But let's say that's an autopilot process."
And then we have whatever you call it,'
the last slide, the urbanized landscape.'
And the urbanized landscape--
houses maybe as many people as in all the cities--'
I don't know.
I mean, I'm not a statistic.
But you could maybe say that if you look at the world'
population map, you see that the area in Java,'
or along the Ganges, are completely populated,'
the whole area south of Shanghai.'
And if you look at the world rice production map,'
you see, more or less, the same.
So those areas are producing most of the agriculture'
production, and at the same time are the most populated areas.'
So maybe half of the so-called urban people,'
according to the UN report, are living in those areas.'
Those areas are originally rural,'
but they are increasingly becoming productive landscape.'
Also because they house industry.'
Think of all the memory stick factories'
along the river in Bangkok, and I don't know what."
So they become really industrialized,'
agriculturized, and also settled.'
And they produce an enormous amount of mobility'
and they get a proliferation of infrastructure.'
So now the question is, is that a future model of urbanization'
that we should take seriously?
Or is it an intermediate stage in the full organization'
of such a whole area?
And what does that mean?
You cannot now say I will make a concept for that,'
or I have an idea for that.
This is a kind of mixture between natural development,'
between prosperity, between the quality of governance,'
et cetera, et cetera.
So thank you for your talk.
Though I don't study urban planning,"
I do have a vested interest in it.'
So I was curious in the development of Schiphol'
as an airport.
If the development of the runways,'
for example, the Polderbaan and the fact'
that it's so far away from the center terminal,"
if the development of the runways at the airport'
substantially affected your planning of the development.'
There is one runway which is called the polder runway, which'
lies is something like six or seven'
kilometers from the terminal.
So once a pilot made the remark when we landed,'
ladies and gentlemen, we have landed somewhere'
between Zurich and Amsterdam and we are continuing our travel'
on wheels.
That's a good question.
It is there because exactly of this kind'
of negotiating moment, where to lay'
the runway in order not to affect houses and urban area.'
So normally, it would have been much closer,'
but this was the only area where the degree of people that'
would be affected by noise and emissions'
and by the calamity legislation would be minimum.'
And so this corridor stays free and is,'
on this moment, in the process of creating'
an edge of recreational sport facilities, and creating, also,'
quite a nice edge condition of urban area around it.'
Yeah, quite OK.
I think we're going to try to wrap it up here."
Many of the people involved in the conference'
and been here all day and it's been a long day."
But I'd like to take one--
exploit my role here and just make one comment'
about your the penultimate answer to the question'
about where are we going to fit all these people.'
And your response, putting the idea of an urbanized landscape'
on the table, I think is a very powerful and important one'
for us here at the GSD.
I'm sorry Charles is not here.
He was around this morning.
There are a lot of concepts floating around.'
There's landscape urbanism, urbanism as a landscape,"
ecological urbanism.
I hear or read your phrasing of the issue urbanize landscape'
in a very different way, as really putting the built form'
that we have associated with cities out'
in spaces that were not associated'
with cities, rural areas.
But they will become urbanized in the process,'
and it's a different way of thinking"
about the combination of landscape'
architecture, urban planning, and urban design, I believe.'
So next time you come back, maybe we'll"
use that as the jumping off point for a conversation,'
because I do think there's a paradigm"
shift in that concept that has implications for how we'
organize our programs and our work,'
and I think it's extremely important."
So thank you so much for leaving us'
with that provocative phrase, and let's offer"
another round of applause.
[applause]
