Welcome.
And I see many guests from outside.'
Aaron, you must be a superstar.
I'm Anita Berrizbeitia.
I'm Chair of the Department of Landscape Architecture."
And thank you, everyone, for coming.'
I am very happy to introduce Aaron Sachs to those of you'
that don't know him.
He's Professor of History and American Studies"
at Cornell University.
And he will talk to us tonight about a history'
of environmental justice.
Environmental justice has been a core value'
of landscape architecture in the United States'
since the field was founded at the end of the 19th century.'
We can argue that Olmsted was first'
an advocate for environmental justice and then a landscape'
architect.
Perhaps even, but in landscape architecture,'
he found the most productive venue'
for acting on his advocacy.
And many in that generation of landscape architects'
were as invested in seeing the laws passed'
to protect landscapes as they were in making projects.'
That commitment to sustained reflection'
on the relationship between economy, environment,'
and people has been consistent in our field to this very day.'
One well-known example, a very recent example,'
is Kate Orff's and Richard Misrach's Petrochemical America"
a photographic and cartographic analysis of pollution'
and the effects of African-American communities'
in what is known now as "Cancer alley."'
Yet, although filled with good intentions,'
our discipline has been, and to this day,'
is, continuously faced with ambivalence, contradictions,'
and difficult ethical dilemmas for which'
there are no easy answers.
As geographer Don Mitchell has written,'
"Landscape hides all kinds of economic and social inequities'
beneath its scenographic beauty."'
And while recognizing the imperative'
to expose the dark side of landscape,'
I am equally interested in the unfinished, unresolved project'
of landscape.
By this, I mean the productive effects'
that this ambivalence can have in our work--'
how it moves us to innovate, to navigate between conflicting'
aims, to search for a better relationship'
with the natural world.
For this, we rely on the help of historians, and especially,'
on our Aaron Sachs, whose work probes these difficult'
questions.
Aaron received his Bachelor of Arts in History and Literature'
from Harvard University, where he wrote his thesis'
on Clarence King and the great frontier'
surveys of the American West.
He went on to pursue a PhD in American studies'
at Yale, for which he wrote a dissertation on Alexander'
Humboldt.
His first book, The Humboldt Current--'
Nineteenth-Century Exploration and the Roots'
of American Environmentalism, addresses the complexities'
of the famous explorer, scientist, abolitionist,'
and proponent of the interconnection of all'
of nature.
To this day, Humboldt's sections that correlate elevation"
with species distribution and spatial pattern'
continue to be core knowledge in our field.'
Yet at the same time that Humboldt,'
through his great vision for a unified natural order,'
he argued against slave-based economies'
and against colonialism.
He also surveyed and mapped mines'
to support mineral extraction of silver and gold'
on behalf of his imperial funders.'
Sachs then maps out for us not just'
the connections, the various currents between Humboldt'
and American-environmental thought, but also,'
the complex relationships between'
romantic and utilitarian notions of nature'
that define so much of cultural production'
in 19th-century America.
For his second book, Sachs turns from exploration'
in distant territories to repose and commemoration nearby.'
Arcadian America-- The Death and Life of an Environmental'
Tradition revisits places that were designed specifically'
for mourning and remembrance--
Mount Auburn Cemetery, Sleepy Hollow'
and the Native American burial ground'
are three seminal landscapes in the history of our field.'
Together, these two books map extreme scales'
of landscape engagement, from the global'
to the immediate and domestic, from the scientific'
to the deeply personal.
While doing so, Aaron Sachs has written,'
in addition to Humboldt, about Olmsted, Andrew Jackson'
Downing, Horace Cleveland, Henry David Thoreau, landscape'
painters, such as Frederic Church'
and Albert Bierstadt, geologist Louis Agassiz and Asa Grey.'
That is the full constellation of characters around which'
the field has developed.
He is currently working on Lewis Mumford, and green urbanism,'
and on the history of environmental justice,'
about which we will hear more tonight.'
A vivid writer, both lyrical and humorous, around Sachs's works"
lies at the intersection of environmental and landscape'
architectural history, and as such,'
gives us greater insights into the broader meanings of design.'
We are very pleased to have you with us here.'
Please join me in welcoming Aaron Sachs as the [inaudible]'
Olmstead lecturer.
Thank you so much, Anita, for that really kind introduction.'
Also, thank you for inviting me here.'
It's an honor.
Thanks also to Ken Stewart, and Paige Johnston,'
and Alaina Fernandes.
And of course, thanks to all of you for being here in the calm'
before the storm.
I'm honored to be giving the Olmsted Lecture."
I'm also just delighted to be here."
I grew up in Newton, just a few miles away from here'
and still love coming back to the Boston area.'
It's definitely home for me.
I'm also just so grateful that the Red Sox finally"
signed JD Martinez, because the offense was really a mess'
last year.
I should acknowledge at the outset'
that my guiding influence, whenever I give a talk,'
is Thoreau, who said in Walden that what'
he looks for in his reading is "perpetual suggestions'
and provocations."
And he also said in a week on the Concord and Merrimack'
Rivers that he thought, a good book'
is one that makes its readers dangerous to existing'
institutions--
just so you know my intentions.
And that leads me to the launching point for this talk,'
which is a picture of my car.
It has New York plates now.
But I actually inherited it from my mother.'
And you can see from the stickers'
where my allegiances lie.
And of course, it's a Prius.
And I just I Find.
It so interesting that this one model of car'
has come to symbolize American environmentalism so thoroughly.'
I'm sure many of you in this room, if you drive a car,"
drive a Prius.
And we all, I'm sure, love the great mileage that it gets."
Personally I also love the way that it handles.'
I've found that I really only need"
to use one hand on the steering wheel, which'
leaves the other hand free to pat myself on the back.'
And I wanted you to know about a new Prius that is'
becoming available very soon.
[video playback]
- A lot of auto makers are rolling out green-energy'
vehicles.
But Toyota says its newest Prius is the most environmentally'
friendly car ever produced.
The secret-- it kills its driver.'
Toyota calls it the Prius Solution.'
When the driver enters the Solution,'
the doors automatically lock.
And a seat belt secures him in place.'
Then it's time for Toyota's revolutionary eco-spike"
technology to go to work, impaling the driver'
through the heart and lungs.
Ads for the solution tout the fact'
that it's the only car out there guaranteed"
to reduce its drivers carbon footprint to 0.'
- The newest member of the Prius family is the greenest member--'
Prius Solution.
When you're dead, you can't pollute."
- Over 1,000 eco-conscious Americans have already'
preordered the Solution.
- I mean, if you care about the planet at all,'
it's the best car you can get.
If your car doesn't kill you, it's like,"
what's even the point?
- The car does have its critics.
Some are complaining it's irresponsible of Toyota"
to not use recycled materials in the construction'
of the Solutions killing spikes.
But Toyota is betting on customizable features,'
like the family Solution, which kills up to six people at once,'
and the Green Gardner, which grinds the body of the driver'
into an organic fertilizer to create healthy demand'
for the Solution.
Members of the media will get a chance'
to test-drive the Solution at Toyota's annual Green Car"
Convention this Friday.
And this lucky reporter happens to be on the guest list.'
So for the last time ever, for Tech Trends, I'm Scott McKay."
[end playback]
OK, I am working on another talk called "The Climate Change'
Comedy Hour."
but don't worry.
This is not that talk.
This is the environmental justice talk.'
I promise.
So it's funny.
It's also a little bit uncomfortable,"
which means I have you right where I want you.'
It's funny, I think, for a number of reasons,"
among them, that the environmental movement'
has always been a little bit anti-human.'
It's as if environmentalists have"
bought into a notion of human nature'
that sees overconsumption and destructiveness as the two'
clear overriding tendencies in our species.'
So then it becomes logical to eliminate destructive behavior,'
with something like the Prius Solution,'
in order to meet the goal of saving the planet--'
rather abstract goal.
I actually have a friend and colleague'
named Jenny Price, who's working on a book"
with the working title right now of Stop Saving the Planet,'
which I would highly recommend when it comes out.'
It's strange, I think, that so many of us"
are still so focused on that abstraction of the planet.'
Remember learning in school that there are basically'
three metanarratives that create dramatic tension in literature?'
There is man-versus-man.
And I'm sorry for the sexist language."
But this is how we all learned it--'
man-versus-man, man-versus-himself, and'
man-versus-nature.
Well, it's as if environmentalists only"
learned the last two.
What about man-versus-man?
What about the social, political,'
economic, and cultural context for environmental degradation?'
The domination of nature, historically,'
has always been intertwined with the domination of some people'
by others.
And anyway, aren't we really talking"
not about saving the planet, but trying'
to save the human beings who are living on the planet?'
And once we're talking about saving people,"
don't we need to acknowledge that some people are far more"
vulnerable than others, and that their vulnerability is not'
their fault, nor random, but rather directly'
related to the historical trajectories of especially'
capitalism and colonialism, both of which'
have explicitly treated certain groups as expendable?'
In other words, I think we need to attach the idea of justice'
to our environmentalism if we want'
to have a meaningful movement.
And in fact, the environmental-justice movement'
now, perhaps best represented by the climate-justice movement,'
has provided great cause for hope-- for me, anyway.'
But then again, what is climate justice?'
And I don't ask this cynically in any way."
I'm not trying to be like one of those critics of the Occupy"
movement who berated them for not'
having a clear vision of what they wanted.'
I think, for me anyway, it was clear from the beginning'
that they wanted to get the question of economic inequality'
back into the public conversation.'
And I think they actually did that quite successfully.'
And that was part of the reason Bernie Sanders'
had such momentum in the first half of 2016.'
And if our democratic institutions'
were somewhat more robust, then he probably would have won.'
But back to the question, what is climate justice?'
And I see it as a true epistemological problem clearly'
related to the centuries-old problem of defining justice'
full-stop.
We can begin to see what climate injustice is, because we know'
that the richer, more industrial nations created'
global warming and the poorer, less industrial nations'
are experiencing the worst impacts of global warming.'
We can look at the 2 billion people living'
in dry-land environments who are finding'
their traditional farming techniques are not'
working so well anymore.
We can look at the tens of millions'
of refugees who are fleeing from coasts,'
and islands, and delta regions because'
of higher-frequency and higher-intensity storms'
and the resulting damage from wind and water.'
And of course, we can look back at the industrial world's"
investments in towering buildings,'
elaborate energy and transport systems,'
and massive manufacturing operations, all of which'
demand more and more fossil-fuel consumption.'
So the ethics are pretty clear here.'
What is not so clear is what to aim for in addressing'
this kind of massive problem.
Just to start with, the obvious way'
to get at the root of the problem'
is to stop releasing carbon into the atmosphere.'
But that does absolutely nothing for the people'
who are suffering from climate change right now.'
It's the tired, old climate-change question"
of mitigation versus adaptation.
The international community is starting'
to have a conversation about human beings' rights"
with regard to climate and environment,'
and also, just as important, about nations duties'
and responsibility.
But the conversation has a long way to go.'
Scholars and activists are coming at this problem'
from every angle you can imagine.'
Legal studies, sociology, cultural studies, literature,'
ethics, political theory, and publications'
about environmental justice and climate justice'
have exploded in the past 10 years or so.'
I'm proposing here just to make some small contribution"
by attempting to think historically about the problem.'
Historical thinking has some advantages,'
I think, in this context.
Perhaps the key lesson of historical analysis'
is that all change is contingent.'
Nothing is inevitable.
And that alone is good grounds for hope.'
And hope is one thing we need.
History has a lot more ethical purchase, also,'
than something like climatology, for instance, because history'
is based on the facts of what has'
happened instead of on models designed'
to forecast our future.
History can, of course, be depressing,'
because it forces us to confront the truth of how consistently'
human beings have perpetrated horrors on one another.'
But it can also be profoundly connective.'
In the case of environmental history,'
it can remind us that societies have survived and thrived'
under many different kinds of circumstances,'
including many different kinds of energy regimes.'
In the end, I think most people find something resonant'
about the question of where we came from'
and how we got to where we are today.'
My parents were homebodies and did not take my sister'
and me out very much.
But I remember very vividly, when'
I was a kid, the one time I went to the MFA.'
This was the painting that I remembered seeing.'
And my father was a professor of French'
and explained that this is asking the question,'
where do we come from?
What are we?
Where are we going?
Of course, climate justice and environmental justice'
have relatively short histories.
In the last couple of decades, it's"
become clear that both movements have'
incredible potential for breadth,'
and solidarity, and constructive action.'
But both have also been hampered by significant problems--'
by vagueness about what they are and what they're doing,"
by internal divisions, , and especially by the charge'
of nimbyism and general negativity.'
I'm sure you guys have encountered the acronym,"
"NIMBY," Not In My Back Yard.
"Backyard" becomes two words to make it a better-sounding word.'
"Nimbyism"-- that\'s been around for quite a while.'
More recently, there's another acronym"
that\'s been thrown around, which is "BANANA."'
You might not know this one.
It's, Build Absolutely Nothing Anywhere Near Anything."
Certainly, part of the problem with environmental justice'
comes from the complexity of how environmental and social issues'
intertwine.
But part of it also comes from the very specific history'
of our thinking about environmental justice.'
In theory, environmental justice is fundamentally'
the goal of equalizing the distribution'
of environmental benefits and environmental burdens--'
benefits being things like, clean air, clean water,'
green space, soil; and burdens being really,'
any form of pollution, or climate instability,'
loss of biodiversity, impoverishment of ecosystems.'
But in practice, the environmental-justice movement'
has almost always crystallized around instances of injustice--'
organizing, gaining momentum in order'
to halt construction of an incinerator in a minority'
neighborhood or to sue a chemical company'
for poisoning working-class citizens who had very'
few affordable housing options.
Most environmental-justice narratives'
that have reached the general public'
basically follow the story line of the film, Erin Brockovich.'
That's from the year 2000.
And I if you haven't seen it or you don't remember it,"
there's a cancer cluster.
Turns out that the utility, Pacific Gas and Electric,'
has been paying people off, taking'
care of their medical bills, and covering up'
the fact that they've been releasing"
hexavalent chromium, which is an anticorrosive chemical.'
In this case, it was being used for cooling towers'
at a compressor station for a natural gas pipeline.'
So there's a successful lawsuit, which makes for a happy ending."
Julia Roberts gets a $2 million bonus.'
Lawmakers even make a very tiny adjustment'
in the amount of chromium that's allowed in the environment."
And then we're back to business as usual."
Most scholarly work actually follows this same story line,'
with just one difference.
In the movie, it's Hollywood.
Everybody's white.
In the scholarly work, it's almost always"
about communities of color.
And in fact, most scholars, I think,'
would trace the environmental-justice movement'
in this country back to Afton, North Carolina,'
in September, 1982, where environmental justice was'
really first defined as "environmental racism."'
The state of North Carolina had applied to the EPA'
for a permit to dump 29,000 metric tons of soil'
contaminated with PCBs, polychlorinated'
biphenyls, the chemical that had made Love Canal famous in 1978.'
Afton was 84% African-American, had a median annual income'
of $6,984.
And EPA's own rules should have made it impossible for this"
to happen, because according to their own regulations,'
there has to be a 50-foot buffer between ground surface'
and underground water table.
But in Afton, the underground water table'
was between 10 and 15 feet below the surface.'
And as it happens, almost all of the residents of the town'
got their water from wells.
Nevertheless EPA granted the permit--'
were in the Reagan years, remember.'
And I put a little note in my talk here saying, "Don\'t rant,"'
because I can't I can't believe that people"
are looking so fondly back on the Reagan years these days.'
But I won't get into that.
There were 500 demonstrators arrested.'
And among the marchers were white male farmers'
from the surrounding countryside,'
white female environmentalists who'
had been radicalized by Love Canal,'
worried black mothers from Afton proper,'
and some of the most prominent African-American men'
in the country.
This person in the front is the Reverend, Benjamin Chaffetz'
Jr., who later went on to cloud Director of NAACP.'
So this was really an exciting and promising coalition'
of environmental types on the one hand,'
and social justice and civil-rights'
types on the other.
North Carolina soil had become a kind of common ground.'
The one major downside, which is not really unpredictable,'
was that there was no support from the major mainstream'
environmental groups.
They were focused on other things.'
Nevertheless, even though the state of North Carolina'
succeeded in building its hazardous-waste facility,'
even though US environmentalism continued'
to focus more, in general, on wilderness wildlife,'
this uprising at Afton did become'
an inspirational illustration of the potential'
for a broad spectrum of activists'
to join together in challenging the structures'
of social and ecological domination.'
The environmental-justice movement made great strides'
in the 1980s and '90s.
New activist groups formed, new scholarship started coming out.'
At the grassroots, organizations demanded more information'
about toxics, more transparency, even more inclusion'
in environmental decision-making.'
Scholars, meanwhile, were proving quite vividly that'
the most vulnerable communities around the world,'
usually poor people of color, were breathing the most'
polluted air, drinking the most polluted water--'
basically being treated as expendable--'
again, very clear ethical implications, in fact,'
much clearer than in many of the other major environmental'
disputes of the late 20th century involving things'
like spotted owls and dammed rivers.'
I happened to start a job in an environmental organization'
in DC called the Worldwatch Institute in January of 1993--'
this was after college for me--
the same week that Bill Clinton and Al Gore'
started their new jobs in DC.
And it was a time of really great hope for anyone'
who was interested in environmental justice.'
In 1991, the first National People'
of Color Environmental Leadership Summit'
had produced 17 core principles of environmental justice, which'
encompassed not just sustainability and antiracism,'
as you might expect, but, also discourses of public health,'
human rights, antimilitarism, self-determination,'
political participation.
And then in 1994, President Clinton'
issued an executive order specifically'
on environmental justice, which was designed'
to prevent the practice of placing'
hazardous-waste facilities in the kinds of communities'
that were least-well equipped to mount a protest.'
That had been a very explicit strategy.'
And many of us at the time were really'
encouraged by this executive order'
and thought that it might even help manufacturers start trying'
to find ways of producing less hazardous material'
in the first place.
Unfortunately, at the same time, Clinton'
was making it easier for companies'
to shift their dirtiest operations'
to other countries via NAFTA and GATT, for example.'
And then by the late 1990s, global climate change'
was starting to dominate environmental discourse.'
And when you're invoking planetary crisis"
and impending doom, then the lens of environmental justice'
starts to seem narrow and local.
And so it fell off for a little while.'
When I was at Worldwatch, I tried'
to jump on the environmental-justice bandwagon'
and published this paper.
And I show it just because I got it out a few weeks ago'
to reread it.
And I was just kind of touched by remembering'
this moment when nonprofit workers would'
produce these little pamphlets and hand them'
around to other nonprofit workers, and professors,'
and graduate students.
And it just it seem so different today with the internet.'
But I stand by the effort that I made'
in that paper to frame environmental justice'
in the broadest terms possible to examine overlaps'
of social and environmental issues at every scale,'
starting with individuals who have been deprived'
of basic human rights, because of their environmental'
activism, for instance, to specific local communities'
that, say, have higher asthma rates because of air pollution,'
to nations who might be struggling'
with cross-border pollution problems or something'
like regional water scarcity, to international organizations,'
like the UN, seeking to protect both'
the substantive human right to a clean environment'
and the procedural rights to assemble and speak out'
to defend one's environment.
But I wasn't a historian when I wrote that paper."
And ever since I became a historian,'
I've been thinking back on it and wondering"
how I might be able to bolster it'
by thinking of environmental justice'
not just as a movement dating back just a few decades,'
but as an idea dating back much further.'
And it continues to strike me that a longer'
history of environmental-justice thinking'
could help us, at least a little bit,'
move beyond the problems of negativity and vagueness.'
We should be able to articulate more'
precisely what we want in explicitly socio-ecological'
terms.
Lately, some people, I think very productively,'
have been turning towards speculative fiction'
to try to envision a better socio-ecological paradigm.'
But my effort is going to be turning toward the past.'
And I think lots of possibilities do open up.'
Even if you go back just a few years to Love Canal itself--'
and Lois Gibbs was the most famous activist from Love'
Canal--
Love Canal helps us go beyond race and class'
to add gender to the mix.
The kinds of health problems at the center of the Love Canal'
scandal, mostly birth defects, are still generally treated'
as part of the family realm, the private sphere, which is still'
often gendered as feminine.
So it's that much more powerful, I think,"
when women start marching in public protests and insisting'
that the men who-- at the time, they were all men--'
running governments and chemical companies,'
need to be held accountable.
Holding men accountable is very hot right now right.'
That same theme arises gender if we look back to 1973'
and extend our reach to northern India,'
where the women tree-huggers of the chipko movement'
launched their campaign to stop government-sponsored'
deforestation, which often caused flooding, and siltation,'
and fuel shortages in local communities.'
Women were usually the ones doing'
the labor of collecting water and fuel wood.'
So the chipko movement also helps'
us incorporate labor issues into the environmental-justice'
paradigm, as do these two.
Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta.
If we look at the situation in California in 1965,'
when they led the United Farm Workers in a strike'
against grape growers, whose insistence'
on the use of certain pesticides, many of which'
are now banned, threatened the health'
of both the surrounding ecosystem'
and the pickers themselves.
So workers' rights, like collective bargaining,"
I think are also crucial to any conception'
of environmental justice.
And there was a social theorist at the same time'
in the mid '60s who was putting all of these social issues"
together with environmental issues.'
And that was Murray Bookchin.
And if you haven't read Murray Bookchin,"
I would highly recommend him to you.'
This is a Vermont intellectual far'
to the left of Bernie Sanders.
In 1965, he published an essay called'
Ecology and Revolutionary Thought, in which he said,'
"The imbalances man has produced in the natural world'
are caused by the imbalances he has'
produced in the social world."
and that, for Bookchin, started with the age-old structure'
of the patriarchal family.
Gender was always at the heart of his theory,'
which he called "social ecology," and which, I think'
is pretty synonymous with environmental justice.'
I like to use "environmental justice," because'
of the resonance of that word, "justice."'
But Bookchin is one of the best theorists'
we have with regard to this intertwining'
of social and environmental issues.'
And ultimately, what he proposes as a positive vision'
is an intensely participatory society--'
a series of de-centralized confederates'
of human-scale communities, founded'
on the principles of free speech, free assembly,'
engaged citizenship, gender and racial equality,'
and shared resources.
Social-ecological thinking, Bookchin argues,'
"must extend itself into a broader libertarian tradition'
that reaches back into the tribal or band-type communities'
ancestral to what we so smugly call'
'civilization,' a tradition, indeed an abiding human impulse"
that has surged to the surface of society in every'
revolutionary period, only to be brutally contained by those'
purely societal forms called \'hierarchies.\'" I love'
the phrasing there and the emphasis that hierarchies are'
not natural.
They're purely societal forms.
This line of thinking connects Bookchin in 1965,'
back to many generations of intellectuals who could be'
considered part of a long environmental-justice'
tradition--
people like the urban critic, Lewis Mumford, or his mentor,'
Patrik Geddes, or the Russian anarchist, Peter Kropotkin,'
or the French geographer,  lis e Reclus,'
or the American theorist of the single tax on land,'
Henry George, or my personal favorite, as Anita mentioned,'
Alexander von Humboldt, whose writings take us all the way'
back to the beginning of the 19th century.'
So when I first conceived this talk,'
my intention was to go back to Humboldt,'
show how he was an environmental-justice thinker,'
and then push even further back to show'
how he had been influenced by earlier debates about land,'
and property, and theories of distributive justice.'
So I started reading Rousseau, and [inaudible],,'
and Thomas Paine, and John Locke,'
Robinson Crusoe, which I think you'
can interpret in a really interesting way'
in this context.
And I do hope that I'll eventually get"
to make this into a short book.
And I just thought I would lay out'
how I'm thinking about the chapters here."
And I would be happy, in the Q&A discussion,'
to talk about any of this.
But I'm not going to flesh it out"
right now, because ultimately, I got kind of obsessed,'
in the past few weeks, with one clear, concrete example'
of an environmental-justice formulation that'
goes all the way back to the 17th century.'
The key thinker here is a relatively obscure Englishman'
named Gerrard Winstanley, who, for a few centuries,'
was mostly lost to history.
But his writings were rediscovered'
in the late 20th century.
And I think it's fair to characterize them retroactively"
as a series of environmental-justice'
manifestos, delivered during the English Civil War,'
mostly in 1649 And 1650.
A less anachronistic way to describe them'
might be as "passionate arguments'
to protect the commons for the use of the landless poor."'
He was he was a pamphleteer, basically.'
This is one of his pamphlets.
And you can, just from that language,'
start to see what he's getting at."
At the beginning of April 1649, Winstanley and about two dozen'
others started digging and planting'
on St. George's Hill in Walton on Thames,"
the area was considered a commons, or waste,'
a piece of land neither owned nor regularly planted,'
and therefore traditionally available to poor people'
as a place where they might gather wood or graze livestock.'
But Winstanley and the so-called "diggers"'
were looking not only to solidify,'
but also to broaden the rights of so-called "commoners,"'
in line with the democratizing tendencies of the English Civil'
War--
the word "commoner" is a very interesting one,'
which, for a long time, I just thought'
of as indicating an ordinary person-- not'
a member of the nobility or the clergy,'
but a member of the Third Estate-- a common person.'
But I think it's just as important"
to think of "commoner" as meaning somebody'
with rights to the commons.
These diggers burned away some of the heath,'
plowed the dirt, planted corn, beans, parsnips, and carrots,'
declaring their intention, quote,'
"to eat our bread together by the sweat of our brows."'
Basically, it was an experimental commune.'
And they invited poor people from around the country'
to join them, encouraging them not only to claim land'
for their own use, but also, to withhold their labor'
from the local lords.
The next month, May of that same year, parliament'
declared that the Kingdom of England was no more.'
This is the English Civil War again.'
And the nation was now officially a commonwealth.'
In this context that word meant mostly'
that the monarchy had been abolished, King Charles having'
been beheaded, and that a new era'
of wider political participation had begun.'
But the word "commonwealth" also resonated'
with earlier meanings.
In the previous century, as large landlords'
had launched what became the Enclosure movement, claiming'
more and more common lands as their own for profit,'
a counter-movement of poor people had arisen.'
And they called themselves "commonwealth men,"'
emphasizing the responsibility of the rich to help the poor'
and attacking this new trend toward profit-seeking.'
The lords had lost some of their military power,'
and they were looking for more economic power.'
We can think of these commonwealth men'
in the 16th century as forming a movement in line'
with some of the ideas expressed in Thomas More's Utopia, which"
was published in 1516.
And if you haven't read it or haven't looked at it recently,"
I'll just remind you that on the small island nation of Utopia,"
all men and women must work.
There are no idle landholders, because there'
is no private property.
And in fact, there had been no private property in England'
until these lords started the Enclosure movement.'
Winstanley was quick to seize on these older'
meanings of the word "commonwealth,"'
as he argued that the new version of England,'
to be true to its identity, would'
have to reign in the wealthy and ensure that all commoners had'
free access to the commons.
The poor, he pointed out, had contributed greatly'
to the overthrow of the monarchy-- paying taxes,'
serving in armies.
And the parliamentarians had indeed'
promised them a new freedom.
The language Winstanley used in making'
these arguments of course, comes from traditions in theology,'
and philosophy, and politics specific to his time and place.'
And yet, I also want to argue that his discourse represents'
something both new and incredibly durable'
in its articulation of the environment'
as a shared resource to which all human beings have'
an equal claim.
"Let us dig on the hill," he says,'
quote, "that we may work in righteousness'
and lay the foundation of making the earth a common treasury'
for all, both rich and poor, that everyone that'
is born in the land may be fed by the earth, his mother, that'
brought him forth, not enclosing any part'
into any particular hand, but all as one man working together'
and feeding together, not one lording over another,'
but all looking upon each other as equals in the creation,'
so that our maker may be glorified'
in the work of his own hands,
and that everyone may see he is no respecter of persons'
but equally loves his whole creation'
and hates nothing but the serpent, which'
is covetousness."
Unquote.
"Let us dig on the hill," he says,'
"and practice usufruct," a word that'
arose in English at about the same time as "commonwealth,"'
"to show that what matters is not ownership, but use,'
to show that, in fact, private property is a curse, since,"'
quote, "those that buy and sell land and are landlords'
have got it either by oppression, or murder,'
or theft.
"Let us dig on the hill," he says,'
"because in the beginning of time,'
the great creator reason made the Earth'
to be a common treasury to preserve beasts, birds, fishes,'
and man, the lord that was to govern this creation, for man'
had domination given to him over the beasts, birds, and fishes.'
But not one word was spoken in the beginning'
that one branch of mankind should rule over another."'
Remember man-versus-man?
Man-versus-man is the real problem.'
"Go about your business, you landlords,'
and let us dig in peace.
We told you that we were not against any'
that would have magistrates and laws to govern'
as the nations of the world are governed.'
But as for our parts, we shall need neither the one'
or the other in that nature of government,'
for as our land is commons, so our cattle is to be common,'
and our corn and fruits of the earth common, and are not'
to be brought and sold among us, but to remain a standing'
portion of livelihood to us and our children,'
without that cheating entanglement'
of buying and selling.
And we shall not arrest one another."'
OK, I could quote Winstanley until the cows come back'
from their common grazing area.
But you get the idea.
And of course, you can predict that his diggers would not'
be able to hold out very long.
There were, in fact, a few other communes'
that arose around the country.
But in every case, the local gentry'
came down really, really hard on the rebels,'
attacking them on horseback, setting fire'
to their crops and huts, driving them away within a few months,'
because these planters on the commons'
represented such a direct threat to the protocapitalist system.'
And remarkably, at exactly the same time,'
similar scenarios were playing out'
across the ocean in the Americas,'
as colonizers gradually encroached'
on the various commons managed by native groups.'
Native Americans of the 17th century'
did not leave behind much in the way of documents.'
But based on the knowledge that we do have'
of their land-management practices and cultural-belief'
systems--
many of these groups, anyway--
we can note the almost uncanny parallels to Winstanley vision.'
These native groups did not live in a wilderness'
as John Locke would argue, but in fact,'
under a regime of collectively owned property, to which'
all human beings were bound under an ethic'
of careful, equitable, sustainable use.'
Now of course, there are limitations'
to Winstanley discourse.
We can't just lift it and use it in the 21st century."
He was dealing with a pretty homogeneous population'
of white Christian men.
I don't think he ever challenged the authority"
of the patriarchal family.
He consistently did endorse a universal egalitarianism,'
but we're left to wonder whether he would have applied it"
to people of color, like the black Africans already being'
enslaved by his countrymen, or the Native Americans already'
being dispossessed by his countrymen.'
I think Murray Bookchin surely would'
have approved of Winstanley invocation'
of a kind of primitive solidarity and anarchism.'
Still, to most modern ears, this form of communalism'
probably sounds romantic and naive.'
I just have to admit that I've found it very helpful"
for myself to travel back to a time'
before the discourses of capitalism and colonialism'
had been fully formed and justified,'
before many people took Adam Smith and David'
Hume for granted and assumed that all human beings would'
always just dominate, and accumulate,'
and covet, according to their own self-interest.'
The idea of the tragedy of the commons'
has been thoroughly debunked by now-- most notably'
by the Nobel-Prize winning economist, Elinor Ostrom.'
But many environmentalists still assume'
that it's impossible to protect any commons,"
because each individual human being is'
inherently bent on consumption and destruction.'
For me, Winstanley at least represents a moment'
when it was still possible to invoke the collective'
over the individual, the common good over private advantage,'
when it was still possible to speak'
of a universal right to direct subsistence from the earth.'
Winstanley often uses the word "livelihood" in this context.'
It's even important to me to consider the implications"
of Winstanley's embrace of humanity's domination"
over nature.
And I'm sure many of you noted that language."
Some environmentalists still blame'
the Judeo-Christian tradition for its emphasis'
on subduing the earth.
But in Winstanley\'s writings, "dominion"'
does not mean exploitation, but rather, responsibility.'
Yes, we all use the resources of the Earth to survive.'
But it's our duty to protect them and share them equally"
with everyone, precisely because that dominion was granted'
to every single human being.
The physical material fact of the commons for Winstanley'
correlates with a vision of commonality'
for all human beings.
I think environmental justice has too often been theorized'
as something that divides us, leaving us'
with victims and perpetrators, which in turn, leaves even'
the most idealistic activists embittered.'
And that embitterment is absolutely justified,'
because, in fact, capitalism and colonialism,'
for the past 400 years, have clearly'
raised up certain people at the expense of others.'
But still, it's important to find ways"
not just of righting old wrongs, but also of moving forward'
as inclusively as possible, like at the end of the Black Panther'
movie, which I would be happy to talk about if people have'
seen it and are interested.
And if you haven't seen it, you should see it."
It's the cultural conversation.
OK what does Winstanley and his legacy--'
what do they mean in 2018 here in the Commonwealth'
of Massachusetts?
The abstraction of commonality is important.'
And I'll come back to that briefly."
But especially since we're here at a design school,"
I wanted to pause for a moment and embrace'
the physical material commons as a site of possibility'
for the environmental-justice movement.'
In a way, maybe Occupy Wall Street'
was as much about that as it was about economic inequality.'
We need to claim as much public space'
as we can, where we can act as commoners, where we can embody'
our role as members of a community,'
where we can care jointly for shared resources.'
I realize this might be very old-hat'
for a design-school audience.
But couldn't it be helpful to redesign our cities"
with a new emphasis on the commons?'
I'll just mention two historical examples"
that I find compelling.
I hope suggesting how, through our experience'
of physical commons, we could gradually'
try to bring our culture back around to putting a higher'
value on the common good.
One could, of course, invoke Olmsted himself.'
But I happen to like even better,'
a landscape architect named Horace Cleveland, whom'
Anita mentioned at the start.
He was from Massachusetts.
Some of you will know him, some of you might not.'
But after the Civil War, he moved out west'
to Chicago and then Minneapolis and St. Paul,'
where he became the primary planner of the park system'
there.
And if you've ever spent time there, even in winter,"
you know how well used the green spaces are in those cities.'
There's a real network of parks.
And the lakes become rinks for skaters and hockey players.'
And I think the reason it's been so successful"
is that Cleveland so carefully emphasized public'
over private space.
I was learning about this, and I was'
sitting in the archives, in St. Paul actually,'
and suddenly thought back to this place in Newton, where'
I grew up, called Crystal, Lake which is a lovely spot.'
Some of you, I'm sure, have been there."
And I've taken my kids there, and it's wonderful."
But there's only a little slice of it"
that is accessible to the public,'
because mostly, it's ringed with private homes."
And that slice is run by the city.'
And it's open for a few weeks in the summer"
for a few hours each day.
Otherwise, you have to be one of the very lucky people with one'
of those homes.
But in Minneapolis and St. Paul, specifically'
by Cleveland's order, houses were permitted only"
on the far side of the road that were built around the lakes.'
The city had to quote, "reserve for public use'
every foot of land between the avenue'
and the water," which made it clear'
that the entire lake and shoreline'
were intended as a commons to be enjoyed freely by anyone who'
wandered into the neighborhood.
And then one more example--
my favorite 20th-century urbanist, Lewis Mumford'
wrote about this community, Sunnyside Gardens, in Queens.'
He actually moved there in 1925.
And he framed it also, as an attack'
against the privatization of space.'
From his perspective, privatization'
had given rise to new feelings of isolation, alienation,'
apathy.
And if you're interested in Sunnyside Gardens,"
and you also like fiction, there's"
a great novel by Jonathan Lethem that just came out'
about five years ago called, Dissident Gardens, that'
is actually about this place.
It was designed by Mumford's friends, Clarence Stein"
and Henry Wright.
And the idea was that there would'
be lots and lots of residences that were oriented inward'
toward the green spaces at the center there,'
which were places where the children could play'
and adults could stroll through the gardens'
and have gardens, where they raised vegetables and flowers.'
And the whole plan was meant to defy the suburban model based'
on isolated freestanding middle-class homes in order'
to foster constant contact and an investment'
in communal living.
As Mumford put it, "When dwelling places'
were understood as social units with the visible coherence'
in the architecture, with a sufficient number'
of local meeting rooms for group activities,'
as in Sunnyside Gardens, a robust political life'
with effective collective action and a sense'
of renewed public responsibility would have'
a good chance of developing.
Effective, collective action, renewed public responsibility--'
let's hope so.
Maybe we could even take responsibility for the climate'
as a kind of ultimate commons.
Could we perhaps say that every human being has'
a right to a livable climate?
Well, with every right come responsibilities,'
duties, obligations.
To ensure the preservation of the commons,'
everyone has to be involved in its management.'
Mitigation and adaptation are equally important.'
And both require systemic change,'
which in turn, will require sacrifice.'
At the 2014, People's Climate March"
in New York, one, of the key slogans'
was "To change everything, we need everyone."'
The more you've benefited from a relatively stable climate,"
the more you owe.
I would urge you, especially, to find'
ways of offering direct aid to those who have suffered'
from climate instability.
Alternatively, we could all just buy a Prius Solution.'
Thank you.
I'd love to take questions.
Yes.
Thank you for that incredibly provocative talk.'
To take up your [inaudible] provocation,'
I ask the following.
Towards the beginning of the talk,'
you began with the holy trinity of race, class, and gender.'
And so I'm curious--
the glancing reference to religion'
as such or Judah-Christian precepts.'
And I'm not referring here to Murray Bookchin, who"
could very well, in fact, quite possibly went to grammar school'
with my grandfather in the Bronx.'
And we can look into Isaiah Berlin'
to see the generation of dissident Jewish sons'
that gave rise to this marvelous communal ethos.'
I'm referring to Winstanley, in fact,"
because when I think of the diggers,'
I immediately think of John Ball's rebellion."
And the rallying cry there-- when Adam delved--'
the diggers-- there was no social inequality at that time.'
And here was this prelapsarian social justice,'
but prior to the "sweat of the brow" that you referred to.'
And I'm just curious that--
I won't belabor this-- but a reluctance sometimes"
to take on the core of Judeo-Christian values'
that inform so much of this discourse.'
I just put that out to you as an invitation to address that.'
Yeah.
Thank you.
That's great.
And it is actually frustrating to me,'
as well, that environmentalists are so unwilling to engage'
with religion.
And I think probably the more work that I do--'
and I'm just I'm just beginning to really get"
into 17th century history.
It's not my normal field.
The more reading I intend to do on religious thinkers who would'
have influenced Winstanley--
it's such a it's such complicated"
question, especially here in the United States.'
But if you're interested, one book"
that leaps to mind that might be useful is--'
I have a friend at Williams College named Nick Howe, who'
just wrote a book called Landscapes'
of the Secular, where he really gets into the question of,'
what does it mean that we commemorate,'
that we have memorials in the form of crosses on hillsides'
here in the United States?
Is that religious?
Is that a religious landscape?
Anyway, thank you.
I definitely take your point.
And I intend to follow up on it.
So this is actually related to religion and environmentalism'
in Cornell.
And that is in the 1970s, there was'
a religiously inspired movement called eco-justice at Cornell.'
It started at Syracuse, apparently.'
But I worked at Cornell in the late '70s."
And in 1978, we had a eco-justice forum,'
where I first met Murray Bookchin in person'
and got really into his things.
There's actually a book that was published"
with a collection of articles.
And you can find it on Google Play.'
It's still available from SUNY Press in hardcover."
Wow, thank you.
I just looked it up.
I didn't know about it.
Yeah.
But it's very interesting, because it happened right"
at Cornell.
And it involved, literally, the environmentalists associated'
with Cornell-- they are academic people who actually had got'
their hands dirty on local environmental issues,'
like the fact that there was an attempt'
to build a nuclear power plant on Cayuga Lake because of all'
the deep water which was cold, to cool it,'
and salt mines to store waste, and all sorts of things.'
So these are people who are academics but also were'
involved with local issues.
So I just wanted to get you informed about that.'
Everybody you talked about are people'
I've studied as I've gone back.
And as far as neighborhoods go, there's"
one locally, which is the Oak Hill neighborhood of Newton,'
which was designed post-war, rather than pre-war'
like the Sunnyside, to turn people inward,'
has paths so kids don't have to walk on streets."
And then going another 100 years back,'
there's the Brook Farm commune in West Roxbury, which"
was gender egalitarian, which was really rare in any'
of these earlier attempts.
Yeah, thanks.
I'm sorry, that's a Cambridge question."
That's good.
Well, I do have a question.
But I also wanted to mention in passing,'
if you don't mind me saying so, you remind me Rod Serling."
You have the same kind of voice.
You even look a little like him.
But I don't know if we're in our own twilight zone here."
But I wanted to ask you a question too.'
But Winstanley notwithstanding, I'm still not clear,"
even after all these centuries, why all human beings, even'
if they are equal, have dominion over nature and over the Earth.'
Shouldn't all species have access to the commons?"
Are we going to continue to privilege'
the human species in its relationship to the Earth,'
regardless of their own interspecies relationships?'
Yeah, great question.
And I have to admit to being a humanist.'
So I do, in fact, privilege human beings.'
At the same time, I think our idea of community'
should be as expansive, and inclusive,'
and capacious as possible.
And so yes, ideally, there should be'
room for all kinds of species.
I do think environmentalists have not'
come to grips fully with the simple fact'
that we must use natural resources to survive.'
The key question is how we use them--'
how carefully we use them.
So yeah, I acknowledge my humanist bias.'
I went into the humanities for a reason.'
Hi.
Where are we?
Oh, hi.
Hi.
Thanks for your talk.
I was just wondering how you think'
these white male American community, or just communities'
in privileged positions for whom you seem to have framed'
this history, can respectfully engage and support'
marginalized or indigenous communities, who'
have essentially, basically always been practicing'
environmental justice for like thousands of years'
in their communities, who actually do respectfully engage'
with other species, and who are still constantly oppressed'
today, even by modern environmental justice'
movements.
I'm wondering, what are your ideas"
about respectful engagement?
Yeah, so right now, my favorite metaphor'
for the kind of engagement that I think you're talking about"
is friendship.
And that that would entail a kind of mutual discourse'
to discover the best ways of providing support.'
Meanwhile, I think all privileged communities,'
like I suggested at the very end,'
owe an incredible to the rest of the world.'
And it's absolutely time to start paying that."
All people of privilege should be, in my opinion,'
contributing whatever they possibly can'
to people who are right now experiencing'
the horrible effects of climate change.'
It really disturbs me when we talk about the future'
and what is going to happen to quote unquote "us," when'
in fact, we've got lots and lots of examples of people who"
are struggling with things that were caused by what has gone on'
in industrial countries.
Those industrial countries owe it to the rest of the world'
to try to help with money, first and foremost.'
A number of ethicists recently have'
published sort of simple injunctions'
to people in the industrial world saying'
like, we know that you feel that contributing $20 to a nonprofit'
is not really doing anything.
But in fact, if everybody did that,'
it would mean a huge amount.
So please keep doing that.
So thanks.
I'm here.
It's fun to hear Murray Bookchin mentioned years after."
I knew him also.
I knew him in New York.
He was an, as I remember him, a very obnoxious character.'
You probably never heard that.
And I would never have expected his ideas, the written form,'
anyway, to get the kind of attraction they seem to have,'
which is interesting to me.
And I'm not against it.
I don't know if you know about his daughter's work."
Have you by any chance--
depending on your level of interest,'
his daughter is very involved with an entity called the Left'
Forum that happens every spring in New York'
and is very involved in a community, in a Kurdish--'
yeah, you know about that.
OK, so that's I guess an embodiment"
of some of Murray's ideas according to some people,"
perhaps.
I don't know.
As an aside, I remember advertisements'
in the subway in New York--
"If everybody would just be a little less greedy."'
And I always thought to myself, yeah,'
here I am riding the subway.
Why don't you tell that to the people"
in the limousines, and the cabs, and the privileged people?'
So I want to mention that in terms of the that's owed,"
it's differentially owed.
We don't all owe the same level of debt."
We didn't all incur the same.
We're not all equally responsible."
So I just want to make that observation'
if you care to elaborate on it.
But I'm always wondering, when you"
hear this story about the diggers and stories'
like that, how was it that what one might have thought'
would have been a majority of the population,'
were not able to prevail over the 1%--'
or whatever the percent was at the time.'
The lords of the manor were presumably a minority.'
How are the lords of the manor able to mobilize enough support'
from the rest of us to suppress those'
who resist the privatization of the common?'
They seem to be able to do it quite well all the time, even'
here in Cambridge.
Well, I think it's about power.
But about the differential debt--'
of course I agree with you on that.'
That's why I phrased it the way I did--"
"The more you\'ve benefited from a stable climate,'
the more you know."
but yeah, the lords had a huge amount of power.'
Thank you for a wonderful talk, which'
resonates with a lot that goes on in this school.'
I want to go to the late middle of your historical brackets--'
so second half of the 19th century.'
And I couldn't stop thinking about the displacement"
of African-Americans in the project of the Central Park'
in New York--
so the Seneca Village issue.
And maybe it's unanswerable, certainly unreconcilable,"
because this is not a project of capitalism,'
nor of colonialism, but one of democracy.'
Well this is where I thought you might lend a hand.'
Albert [? fein, ?] 30 or 40 years ago, would have said,'
this is the greatest expression of the American democracy'
in physical form, or physical terms.'
Ethan Carr might say, the greatest American work of art.'
And yet, we have enormous contradiction.'
I just wonder how you reflect on that.'
Yeah.
Thank you for the question.
And it's a tough one.
I think probably many of us in this room'
really want to love Central Park.'
And I certainly do.
But it would be hard to make an argument'
that any kind of development in the 19th century'
was not about capitalism and colonialism.'
Those people living in Seneca village had no chance.'
And the people really driving Central Park were elites.'
And as I'm sure you know, some geographers"
have even made the argument that part'
of the rationale for building Central Park'
was just to bring property values up.'
So it's always complicated.
I do think Central Park is a great democratic institution.'
And some of the motivation behind it was democratic.'
But some of it was also capitalistic.'
And that image of the removal of people'
is one I think we should all try to keep in our minds'
as something that has always happened in the last 400 years.'
And I try to be hopeful in the kind of history that I do.'
And I try to emphasize positive examples that'
can be of use to people today.
But I also sometimes think about the last 400 years'
as one extended land grab.
Unfortunately, there's a lot of evidence"
to support that kind of characterization.'
I was wondering whether you could elaborate even further'
on your ideas about how humanity scholars, humanists, historians'
can contribute effectively to making maybe policy changes'
or shaping the environment at large.'
Yeah, thanks.
Now I think the realm of culture is always up for grabs.'
And many humanists specifically, work on culture.'
I'm struggling with this question a little bit,"
because I know that in this case,'
it was asked from a very sympathetic perspective.'
But I've often answered the question,"
when asked by scientists, who are saying, basically,'
who are you, and what can you contribute?'
We've got the technological solutions."
And the thing that I usually say--'
and I hope this doesn't come across as defensive--"
is that it's interesting, isn't it,"
that we've had technological solutions for a long time?"
And the problem has been implementing them.'
The problem has been mindsets and political will.'
And we in the humanities, I think,'
are pretty well positioned, depending'
on how we choose to communicate, to get'
people to reconsider their assumptions, their mindsets.'
And I think there is some power and influence there.'
I hope there is.
It's surprising what happens in our culture."
It's when those of us who care about these things"
sometimes have a tendency to get really,'
really frantically upset when something happens,'
like the Trump election, myself included.'
But I think one nice thing about the humanities in general,'
and, history in particular is is that it helps you'
step back and gain perspective.
And when many of my colleagues have told me'
they assume that Trump must be the worst president ever in US'
history, I'll say like, well, let me tell you"
about James K. Polk.
It's always possible to think differently."
Thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Thinking about the tool to make people feel responsible'
and to act responsible towards the environment,'
I'm going to ask you the question, where"
do we need to start to create this human-responsibility list?'
Should we go to the United Nations organization level'
and create something like, in parallel with human rights?'
In my opinion, we are like mist to create'
from the very beginning, like to parts of human rights'
and human responsibility.
Yeah, so where is the starting point you see?'
And to what extent we should go further'
to feel responsibility and tale responsibility'
toward the environment.
Yeah, thanks.
I think for me, the most interesting scholars working'
on environmental justice today are emphasizing that it's"
a multi-scaler problem.
So the interventions that we can make'
have to happen at the very local neighborhood level.'
They have to happen at the regional level, the state'
level, the nation level, the international-community level.'
And it has to be in many different disciplines'
and arenas--
not just culture, but also law, for instance,'
et cetera, et cetera.
So I don't have any way of prioritizing"
one kind of intervention.
But I just would emphasize that it'
has to happen at all of those different scales.'
And one can also then say, well anything'
I do even at the local level is a contribution.'
I do believe what I said about the creation more and more'
common spaces, where people feel the need to care'
for them as a community.
I think that that creates a powerful sense'
of responsibility.
The most obvious one for me right now'
is the community garden, which is becoming really,'
an incredible trend, especially in large post-industrial cities'
around this country.
Urban gardening, urban farming are really important now.'
And I think those are great movements.'
Hi.
Just talking more about common spaces,'
could you give some like examples or best practices,'
in terms of implementing or how common spaces have'
been implemented or introduced to cities, municipalities,'
and moving forward, like how we can try and make'
that more of a priority, I guess?'
I don't have any more examples off the top of my head"
than the ones I've already talked about."
But I will just say that especially in Elinor Ostrum's"
work, the economist who debunked the tragedy of the commons,'
the key point is that there has to be a communal system'
of management for the commons.
In other words, everybody has to buy in and participate'
in the development of various kinds of regulations.'
So for any kind of common space, the corollary'
is political participation.
That's a must.
That's one of the keys to anything"
we might wind up calling environmental justice.'
Thank you so much, Aaron.
