- Good evening.
My name is Mohsen Mostafavi.
I am the dean here.
And I just wanted to welcome all the admitted MDes/ MDE'
candidates here to the GSD.
It's really wonderful that you're here."
I had hoped that we would actually meet earlier today'
and we would have some time together,'
but somehow our calendars didn't quite"
work out at exactly the right time that was good for you.'
So I'm really happy to be extending a welcome."
I'm so happy that you're here.
I hope you've had a good day.
Both the MDes and the MDE programs'
are really such important parts of the school.'
And over the last, probably, five or six years,'
we've spent a lot of time trying to work on ways in which"
the focus--
the attention-- that these programs receive'
is something that is at the forefront of our attention.'
I think a lot of our faculty have been really focused'
on this.
We are so proud of the faculty who'
are involved with this program.
And we're so proud of the people who are participating"
in these programs.
What is really, in a sense, significant about both the MDes'
and the MDE program is that they're really dealing with"
significant domains of thought that have important'
consequences, in terms of the built environment, broadly,'
and that they also are designed so that they are simultaneously'
areas of specialization-- of focus--'
but they also enable a great deal'
of interaction between them.
And this is important, in a way, to be able to come to the GSD'
and to concentrate on a particular area,'
but at the same time know that there is, in a way,'
a kind of broader milieu--
there is a broader context for the work that you are doing--'
and that you are able to participate and engage'
with a much richer, in a sense, domain of interaction'
across these different disciplines.'
And I think the open projects that you've"
been hearing about today is also a more recent attempt'
to try and make their concept of interaction'
across their different tracks of the MDes program, for example,'
much more formally located, which'
I think is also very important.
Obviously, we would love to-- after the talk--'
to hear from you if you have any thoughts or questions.'
And once again, it's great that you are here."
Those people who are here for the MDE program--'
of course, we're now going to be entering the second year"
of the MDE program.
And that has also been such a vital program,'
based on the collaboration between the GSD and SEAS,'
which is the engineering school here,'
and really focusing on sort of key challenges'
that face us and face the environment,'
and at the same time combining that'
with entrepreneurial approaches towards addressing those.'
So in a way, the various tracts that'
are in the MDes program, the eight tracts, many of them'
benefit, I think, from the work--'
the artistic practice of Janet--
who's here with us, I think--
Janet Cardiff.
We're so happy that you are here."
And as you know from the material'
that I think some of you have received,'
Janet has been working for quite some time with her partner,'
George Bures Miller.
And after living in Berlin for quite some time,'
then moved back to Canada some 10 years ago,'
and has been very much engaged with her practice'
across the globe in many different locations.'
One of the things that I sometimes'
feel when we're working in the field of design,"
and we make projects, we make drawings,'
is that it's occasionally a little bit"
akin to making a kind of silent movie in a way.'
Because you make models.
You make assumptions about the people who'
will be living in these things.
But it's all either in the imagination"
or it's in the realm of drawings and models, in a way."
And so the thoughts that we all have about'
how a landscape will live, how a house will be occupied,'
and how a city will be a place for its inhabitants'
is actually constantly in the realm of our imagination.'
I think the work that Janet and her partner are involved with'
is really a world that also helps to--'
through sound, through other forms of participation,'
through movement, through working--'
makes that world alive.
And we have been very much-- many of us--'
enthusiastic about this kind of practice--'
about the relationship between performance and, in a way,'
the way in which we imagine things.'
And that intersection of performativity'
and the spatial dimension of our practices'
is really something that is absolutely'
critical to what we do.
It's with that in mind that, also a few years ago, we"
set up, for example, what we call'
a platform here at the GSD, which'
is a transversal academic intellectual project'
across our departmental structures,'
called a sensory media platform, that'
has been led by a number of our faculty,'
including some of the faculty who are here, like Silvia'
Benedito and others.
And I think the purpose of that has'
been to go beyond the purely visual dimension'
by actually considering the sonic-- the haptic.'
And again, I feel that many of the tracts of the MDes program'
really consider their relationship'
to the built environment in a much broader sense that'
actually connects very directly with questions of memory,'
history, temporality, as well as,'
of course, the sonic dimension that'
is so much part and parcel of what Janet has been doing.'
And I think we're all in for a treat."
So would you please join me in welcoming Janet Cardiff.'
[APPLAUSE]
- Thank you very much.
It's very encouraging to hear about so much collaboration"
between different sort of media and different practices,'
because in Berlin, when we lived there,'
that's one shock I got-- that we would be invited by theater"
directors, or by symphonies, or architects'
to work with and collaborate with.'
But it doesn't happen so much in North America."
And I think it's a really good sign."
I think it just makes sense.
And naturally, I think I've always been"
drawn to that type of practice.
I wanted to show you a couple of early works,'
because I'm going to talk a little bit"
about the collaborations between George and I. George'
and I met in art school.
I was a graduate student.
He was a grade--
no, he wasn't in grade two.
He was in the second year.
So he wasn't that young.
But anyways, so he was a painter and I was a print maker.'
But for some reason, even our first date we got together,'
we started making works together.'
And it was like a recording of--
we went to a crazy concert, recorded it, and then'
put it in front of the TV with the sound'
off with a six-pack on the side.
So that was our first collaboration.'
And then we started making films together.'
But he helped me in my practice, and I helped him'
in his practice.
And he was very much into this idea of--'
he started working on a lot of kinetic sculptures in the 90s.'
We started officially working together in '95,"
but we actually were together in 1982.'
So it's a very long time--
before some people were born.
And I want to show you this piece,'
because it has the elements that keep reoccurring'
in a lot of our works, and this idea'
that what we know of technology, we can't believe--"
that there's magic involved.
And it doesn't take much to have our beings want"
to be involved in that magic.
And he quit painting, because it was a modernist school.'
And then he went into a program in Toronto'
that involved electronics.
And that was his natural forte.
We did Super 8 films.
We did lots of filmic work.
And so the whole sense of noir-ish films'
and kinetic sculpture, and then I started adding sound'
into print, and then eventually just gave up the print making.'
Because once I started working with sound, I realized,'
this is the medium for me.
It works in a way with memory that nothing else works.'
I mean, you're having to remember the sentence"
that I said last, right?
And it sort of fades away.
But there's little pieces of it that come out."
And then something that's important to you"
isn't important to you.
I started working in this way with walks and installations,'
because I liked how the viewer or the listener'
started adding their whole memory'
bank to the actual piece.
So let's see.
I just want to show you how this one functions.'
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[JUMPING]
It's actually controlled by a beep"
that he triggered when he was jumping.'
And his beeping on the trigger made the TV move,'
so then I filmed it while he was doing it.'
And then I actually did the Foley sound.'
It's my footsteps that you hear, because he"
couldn't coordinate that.
But he did a whole series this idea of aerodynamics,'
and how video actually--
once you move the video, or once you move the monitor,'
it doesn't become a flat image--
a flat virtual space-- anymore.
It actually becomes a physical space.'
[END PLAYBACK]
And at the same time-- this is 1992 as well--'
I was working on bare speaker installations.'
And we're really involved in this idea of cubist narrative."
For some reason, I just loved any films that dealt with how'
to--
it's hard to describe, because I have a sense of--"
I see sound in waves.
And I always want to make that sort of environment'
for the viewer.
So I came to George with an idea.'
We had this old table that we found.'
And I loved how there was the memory'
of the marks in the table.
It was an old carpenter's table.
And I want to have sensors in the tables'
and then have the sound come around.'
And then I wrote script and then I recorded sound effects--'
took stuff from the TV, did all sorts of things.'
And so, of course, George figured it out,'
because he's really good technically."
That's why we make a good partner team."
Because I'm not anymore.
I used to be a bit.
But he's so good that I just let him do everything."
But I love experimenting with ideas.'
I'll give you a little.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This shows a little bit of the soundtrack'
and how it started to mix.
- You ain't gonna get away with it, kid."
- What do you want?
- I see you.
Hanging around him.
Making love to him.
Kissing him.
- Maybe I do like him.
That's none of your business.
- Picture this image.
A small bedroom at night.
Outside, you can hear the wind in the trees.'
A light shines onto the bed.
Roman--
[END PLAYBACK]
- So that's a really seminal work for me."
And it comes back in some of our later works.'
And today I'm going to show you--"
I'm going to speed through some, and pause on some--"
but show you different thematics that we've been working on."
Because there's so many different ways"
to come at a problem.
Like if you were trying to work with sculptural sound,'
then you can work with ideas of speakers'
around-- bare speakers-- or you can work with audio walks.'
I was experimenting in a residency in Banff, 1991.'
and also working on the soundtrack'
for the previous piece there.
And they had a Sennheiser dummy head.'
And I started experimenting with it.'
And then I was recording walks, just'
on a regular playback machine.
And I pushed the wrong button and ended up'
hearing my voice talking and describing things'
as if walking along.
And it was one of those aha moments.'
And I thought, this is really cool.'
So I got my four-track out.
A four-track was a cassette deck.'
And it was a way of mixing four tracks.'
It was really amazing back then.
And made the first audio walk that I did.'
And I was really intrigued with, when you listened'
to it in the very same site--
and that's what's important about the audio walks,"
is, you're getting--
in this case, I gave a few friends the cassette deck'
and a headset.
And then they were given directions'
to walk around a particular forest.'
And you'd hear virtual people run by,"
or hear fake birds and all that.
And I realized that I was creating a film soundtrack'
for the physical environment.
And that really intrigued me and how,'
for every person that's walking, it's a different piece."
And also, I could have this surrogate relationship'
with the viewers.
Because I didn't have to be there and talking to them"
and whispering in their ears and stuff.'
But I could have this thing that I just send them off with.'
And I didn't even know if it was art back then."
And actually, I was kind of afraid to show it to anyone.'
Because people really didn't--
it's surprising to think, but 1991, in Canada--"
luckily, there was a curator, Kitty Scott,'
who went, like, "Oh, this is pretty neat."'
And then she gave it to someone else who'
was curating a show in Denmark.
And then it actually went on from there.'
And it ended up in Muenster, Germany.'
But I started getting invited all over the world'
to do these projects., and, I think, in 10 years,'
to 20 different audio walks.
And how I record them is, we go to a particular site--'
George ended up editing them.
And I just want to talk about technology'
and how it's such an inspiration."
Because first, it was a four-track.'
And then it was reel-to-reel, we did a walk.'
And that's really impossible.
Because you're working as a visual artist invisibly--"
having to work in a studio and do a written'
script when this sound goes up, when this sound goes up.'
And then ProTools came out with a computer that could actually'
do it in 1996.
And it was really hard to do, like, eight tracks'
and have the computer still run.
So that sort of thing made a huge difference.'
So I think a lot of our work actually got--'
once the technology came out, then we'
were stimulated to do something.
So I haven't described that these"
are recorded with binaural.
That's a piece that was in Central Park that's actually"
still available online.
If you're in New York and want to do an audio walk in Central"
Park, you can download some photos and other things.'
But this is a piece-- the last audio walk that we did.'
Because it started with a format where we kind of got'
bored with it.
I got bored with writing the scripts for it.'
We always like to push ourselves in every different piece we're"
making.
Or actually, I really like to learn from my art.'
And it's surprising what you make."
I'm sure you all find that here in a work"
environment like this.
Because it taught me a lot about ideas of virtual reality.'
It taught me a lot about where a body can be related in space.'
Because what you do is, I walk around with this blue head.'
And she's got two microphones in her ears."
And it records three-dimensionally,'
because it's the way we hear.
Because if I go like this, the microphone'
records it directly here.
But with this microphone, it records the sound bouncing'
to that wall and back here.
It creates a three-dimensional picture.'
So when you're listening with headphones,"
it is a three-dimensional thing.
It's called binaural-- basically two ears,"
two audio experiences.
So this is me directing the invisible soldiers.'
In every site, it's like creating Foley sound."
You're creating environment.
These people are running by.
And it's so important to be right exactly on the spot."
Because you don't realize how much"
you know about sound when you're listening to a situation."
Because if you listen to this piece in this room,'
it sounds like a recorded thing.
But when you're on location listening to the sound that"
was recorded maybe a month before, or two weeks before,'
in the very same location, then there's"
slightly different sounds-- like maybe a dog walks by'
and it's not there in reality.
But you have this syncing up.
So you have the recorded space, you have the physical space,'
and then you have this third space that creates a new world.'
And that's what I was very interested in, as well"
as the textures.
This was the Louisiana museum in Denmark,'
which is a wonderful museum.
It's one of the best museums, architecturally,"
I think, for many generations.
I can't remember when it was built. But the museum"
itself actually has so many different spaces for the viewer'
to encounter, like low ceilings high galleries,'
underground galleries, ones where you see the outdoors.'
And this was a George [INAUDIBLE] sculpture'
that I walked on from the museum.'
To me, textures are so important.'
And the George [INAUDIBLE] sculpture'
had a variety of textures, because you unconsciously'
hear the footsteps.
And you know that you're walking on metal"
when you're walking there.
You know you're walking on stone."
So it's funny, because it's just like when"
I used to teach drawing, or when I took a pretty basic,'
traditional BFA.
And so when you're drawing, you think about textures."
You think about this, then.
It's the same with sound.
When you're looking at a location,"
you're always thinking about textures--"
small space-- an alleyway-- versus a big space.'
So whenever George and I were designing the walks,'
we had to think about--
like this one.
It's still available, I think.
The building has totally changed.'
It used to start at the--
let's see.
There's part of it.
It used to start at the Whitechapel Public Library'
and now it's the Whitechapel Gallery."
But I think they still will let you do it.'
And it starts off with library sounds'
and then you walk through.
But that was important.
This kind of space is kind of like a Jack the Ripper space.'
And then you end up in the Liverpool station.'
And then you go through all various things.'
So your body totally gets a sense [INAUDIBLE].'
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Turn left at this corner.
[END PLAYBACK]
- So this is just a very short sound excerpt'
from the actual piece.
And this is in the East End of London around Brick Lane.'
I don't know if any of you remember,"
there was a series of bombings by--'
I think he was a homophobic person and terrorist, in ways.'
And he was putting bombs in various places.'
But bombed Brick Lane like 10 minutes'
after I walked by, basically, recording.'
But in this piece, we used a lot of sound effects,'
because London has such a history.'
There's sounds you can bring from the war."
There sounds you can bring from the blitz.'
And then there's car alarms.
There's this and that, from all different time periods."
Like we even took some helicopters from Vietnam.'
And I love how you can take all these different spaces'
and put them together and they create one new space.'
Makes you think about so many different things'
philosophically, about how we exist within these spaces'
and how we bring all these spaces with us,'
sound-wise-- acoustically.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Turn left at this corner.
[END PLAYBACK]
- Sorry, one thing I wanted to say--'
the sound you hear is the sound that she's hearing."
So you're not actually hearing the actual environment"
that she's in.
You're hearing the recorded audio."
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Turn left at this corner.
[FOOTSTEPS]
We're on Fashion Street now.
- The shopkeeper on Brick Lane described her as tall,'
with long red hair, and an American accent.'
- This is the street that I saw in the book--'
the narrow lane with children watching the camera--'
only there was a lot of fog in the air, and cobblestones.'
The book told the story of a man who'
lives in one of these houses.
[VIOLIN MUSIC PLAYS]
For 20 years, he searched for the woman'
he loved, waiting for her to come back,'
playing his violin in his room.
How can we just walk over their footsteps and not remember?'
There's a lime--
[PLAYBACK ENDS]
- Oh, she was going to say there's"
a lime green car parked there.
One of the parts of the walks is that we always look in the area'
and find what is reoccurring all the time,'
so that when people are listening to recorded audio,'
then they see the physical reality'
that lines up with that, they know it's recorded."
So It gives it this sort of strange--'
It sort of dislocates people.
But I have to hurry on here to get to a few--'
I want to get a few of these points,'
because I think it's very interesting how you learn"
from your practice so much.
This lining up of the audio made me think about, well,'
what about photographs?
So the Central Park walk actually'
used this idea of found photographs.'
And like Mohsen was saying about researching the area in London,'
I did tons of research and historical research'
in this area.
And it would bring up particular stories.'
And I didn't actually--
I posed these photos, so they weren't real."
But most people thought they were actually found photos.'
Because I made them look like 1970s photos.'
And the idea that there's so many couples in the park,"
and then brought out this story.
But it gave the idea of the video telescopes.'
And in this one--
I'll show a very short excerpt, just because it really--"
it's hard to describe this work, because it's very"
much about being there at site.
So as we were talking earlier about documentation,'
it's almost impossible.
But I think this gives a little bit of an indication.'
By the way, this is the old SF MOMA, before the renovation.'
Like this is 1999.
So now, the wall isn't even there."
First, they put a wall there.
There was no parking lot.
And then now, there's not even a street next door."
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
So what's inside the telescope is actually a recorded video"
on a [INAUDIBLE] camera that was recorded--'
the tracking was recorded.
- [INAUDIBLE] [END PLAYBACK]
- Sorry, I love her smile.
Sorry.
I have to wait for that.
But that gave us the idea that-- one day,'
we were sitting having coffee, and I was just playing around'
with one of these Hi8 video recorders--'
fancy thing-- and George got up and went in the kitchen,'
and then I replayed the video and went, "This'
is the same as a telescope.
Why not have the people be the moving'
around instead of the telescopes moving around?"'
So then we were invited to do an audio walk in Pittsburgh.'
And I had said to Madeleine Grynsztejn,'
the curator there, "Well, I have this idea I\'d like to work on.'
I don't know if it'll work.
We've never done one before.
But we want to do a video walk."
So we had to buy all these cameras'
and had to sort of matrix story.
And then we did one in the Hebbel theater'
in Berlin by a director who's asked"
to do a couple of projects.
And it's really great, because they still"
mount it occasionally, when the theater is empty.'
But now it's on an iPod or iPod Touch."
And it went backstage and everything.'
And this is in Kassel for documenta-- the last documenta.'
And it's in the train station.
And it's interesting with historical stuff."
In Germany, you don't have to show much at all,"
because the history is so thick there that if you show one'
little thing-- this happened to be--'
just by chance, because we like the site--'
there were a couple of various interesting textures,'
and lots of places to go, as well as,'
you could see the video screen.
It wasn't too bright.
But also this was a train station in Kassel'
where, on track 13, they had shipped'
Jewish people to the camps.
So one of the things was to find where'
that was and just show it.
And then there was a dance sequence and stuff.'
It was a variety of things.
But we've worked and worked trying"
to figure out how to show documentation of this.'
And so George has got a green screen and a little camera here'
and it sort of works so you can see a little bit of it.'
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- OK.
Turn the camera on.
Press the video button.
I'm sitting here right now with you"
in the train station in Kassel watching the people pass by.'
It's very intimate in ways, watching people."
You can see how they walk, so you'
can tell if they're happy or sad or lost somewhere"
in their mind.
[FOOTSTEPS]
This video will be an experiment.'
We're like those prisoners stuck in Plato's cave."
They watch the flickering shadows on the screen.'
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Try to allign your movements with mine.'
Move your screen up to the left as I do.'
A red coat.
I used to have one.
Wonder where it went.
So many people wear black here.
Garbage pails have moved.
Do you see the musicians?
They're between the pillars now.
Let's get up.
Follow them.
And turn to the right.
Try to follow the image.
Now stop and watch.
[DOG BARKING]
[CHATTER]
Let's continue.
[END PLAYBACK]
- That was one of those happy accidents.'
Oops.
So that's where they start.
They're always has to be a hand-out system."
And then there's a couple of guys waiting behind."
And it's important to me that they actually go individually,"
so you don't have that sense that you're in a crowd."
So the ergonomics of the piece is part of the piece.'
And the people that hand it out are always part of the piece.'
I just want to show you this.
George has a Steadicam at the back and a cinematographer'
we're working with there.
And then these are the fake crew that were'
photographing the ballerina.
And it was minus 20 in this train station that day.'
And that poor ballerina would do this'
and then she'd run off and get her coat on."
It was so cold to do this production.'
Germany had a very cold spell.
So now I'm going to skip to-- that was 2012."
But I wanted to show you--
I won't show you much video of this at all,"
but we were trying to figure out how'
to use this binaural within a sort of theatrical situation,'
so that you'd put on the headset and go In."
This is a piece that's one person,"
and it's a five minute long piece."
It was a disaster at openings because there'
were such huge lineups.
But it was a sort of a Hitchcock--'
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Shh, it's going to start.
- --thing of a little opera--
[APPLAUSE]
--singer that we had a little video production of.'
And it\'s called "Playhouse," because everything\'s'
made of cardboard.
[OPERA MUSIC]
[END PLAYBACK]
You couldn't tell from that, but maybe from this one."
This was the one we thought, "Oh, it\'s great.'
It\'s like three people at a time."'
And when it first-- it actually showed'
at the Tate Modern opening, and people'
we're grabbing them off other people's heads, the headphones."
So that didn't work very well.
And I don't know if you can see here,"
but it's actually an architectural model that's"
in 3D perspective, so that the little seats at the front'
are very tiny, and then they got bigger as you went back.'
And then George and I made this film, and it breaks at the end,'
and there's a shooting in the theater, which"
was very kind of prescient.
And it's kind of a film noir film."
And then we were invited to the Venice Biennale.'
And we thought, well, we'll make a bigger piece."
The Canadian pavilion is like the tool'
shed between the British and the German pavilion.'
And it's that shape.
So we basically made a structure that would fit into it.'
And then it's a bigger theater.
But we really pushed the whole idea of the Cubist space'
here, and cubist narrative and cubist film,'
so that this piece starts with the sound all around you.'
And then it goes into the film.
And then a character comes forward.'
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Shh.
It's starting.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
- Like we recorded within the box, with a head--'
[FOOTSTEPS]
--and then bringing in other sounds'
we recorded in an empty apartment'
room, and another singer.
And then--
- I heard a man pass by under my window last night.'
I listened to his footsteps as they faded into the distance.'
Only the second person this month.'
How long have I been here?
[THUNDER]
- It's time to wake up now.
[CELL PHONE RINGING]
[ZIPPER ZIPS]
- [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[END PLAYBACK]
That's That's actually Carolyn Kristof answering her phone"
in the physical sculpture.
But we'd made a film, and then we"
recorded it regular with a boom mic.'
And then we rerecorded in the Delphi Theater.'
And whenever you listen to it in the actual artwork,'
it sounds like you're in a big theater,"
because it's recorded with binaural there."
But there's a plane that goes over."
So in Venice, you thought there was a plane going over.'
But it was actually in Berlin that was going over.'
Do you understand what I mean?
It's kind of hard to explain because it's a difficult medium"
to show.
This one was a fun one because--
oh, Volker Spangler, who's acted in 14 Fassbinder films."
He's an amazing brain-- amazing character."
And then at the end, we actually burned down a house.'
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[HOUSE BURNING]
[END PLAYBACK]
I phoned up my dad and said, "Have you'
taken down that house yet that\'s on your extra property?"'
He goes, "No."
"Can I burn it down?"
He said, "Sure."
So we got the local fire department.'
And that's how those seats--
that's a problem with the binaural,"
you have to have headphones.
So this was another aspect of our work'
is, we worked with totally bare speakers'
and worked with complete sound.
And the very same year that we did The Paradise Institute'
at Venice and also moved to Berlin, we produced this piece.'
And it all came about because some singer I'd hired"
recognized I really loved a three-dimensional sound.'
And so she was like, "Have you heard Spem in Alium'
by Thomas Tallis?"
I said, "I don\'t know.
I can\'t remember."
And so when I listened to it on two speakers,'
I went, "This is just crazy.
I want to hear it in 40 speakers."'
And sometimes we get lucky.
Because I said to George, "We can do this.'
It'd be easy.
Just have 40 CD players."
And he goes, "No.
That won't work.
Because if they're slightly out of phase, it'll just go, like,"
tch-tch-tch--
they'll have this phasing sound.
And so right at the moment, Tascam'
put out 24-output machines.
And nobody had those before.
And so we were able to actually put those together and sync up'
40 tracks of separate sound and record 40 singers--'
actually there were 60 singers, because there's three kids"
for every soprano voice.
And we recorded it in a dead space,'
so that whenever we take this piece-- and it's showing all--"
I call it "the Eveready bunny" because it just goes everywhere'
and never wears out.
But it has to be tuned for every particular space.'
I have a tonmeister I work with.
And this is a reconstructed chapel within the National'
Museum in Canada.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Twenty.
- And this is--
- The last bar and the first bar.'
And then that first one.
- Yeah.
[END PLAYBACK]
- So we recorded even while the singers were just'
taking a break.
And then--
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- I'm doing it there.
That's me.
- To give them that sense of actual people coming out.'
[CHOIR SINGING]
[END PLAYBACK]
That's all I'll play, because it's really hard for me"
to hear it on two speakers, because I'm"
used to hearing it on 40.
And it sounds way better on 40.
But it's shown a lot of different spaces."
And I've learned a lot about acoustics and a lot"
about museums.
And we were talking about ideas of how the sound systems'
in museums--
the curators say, "Yeah, it\'s a really quiet space.'
It\'s great."
And we go there and go like, "What\'s that buzz?"'
Or, "What\'s that whoosh sound?"
Or a [HUMS].
So we have our tonmeister go to every particular space,'
make sure, acoustically, it sounds good.'
You know, the funniest thing is, some of the--'
[CELL PHONE CHIMES]
Oh, I'm sorry, I meant to turn that off."
It's supposed to be off.
Oh no.
[INAUDIBLE]
Some of the most beautiful spaces'
actually sound the worst.
Like, the worst is glass and cement.'
We discovered that you can't show in any carpeted spaces."
You can't show in--
sometimes they have weird spaces like this.'
This was a terrible space.
It was visually beautiful and kind of spooky,'
but it was very hard acoustically.'
This was a very difficult space.
It was the first piece that had shown there'
after they took down the big Kiefers at the Hamburger'
Bahnhof in Berlin.
So what you can see on the side, there's hanging curtains."
So we hung curtains this far out from the wall'
all through the entire space.
A very thin piece of material, but it'
was enough to stop the echoes.
Because this piece, The Murder of Crows--'
we decided that we wanted--
it was a big jump between Forty-Part Motet in 2001'
to this one in 2008.
But we kept thinking we wanted to make'
a piece that was the same kind of physical audio sound.'
We had Russian choirs in it.
And we wanted to make sort of a film soundtrack'
without much narrative.
And it's got big wave surf.
It's got this huge amount of sound."
And it's usually shown in about a 70-meter long space."
So it's shown in a lot of different amazing spaces."
And one of the themes behind the piece is the Goya--'
you know the Goya etching, The Sleep'
of Reason Brings Impossible Monsters--'
is that what it's called?
Yeah.
Anyways, this idea of the nightmare--'
it was actually after the Iraq War'
and reading the Herald International Tribune'
all the time and reading about the victims'
of the American bombs.
And one story I read was a father'
coming back and finding his daughter's arms"
hanging on the chandelier.
And so it created a whole-- this is also'
an opera within this piece.
As well as, we were in Nepal for-- this is it'
at the Armory in New York.
It was a wonderful space because it's all wooden floors."
And we needed a dead space that you could actually'
see the sound move around.
If you have too much reverberatory space, then'
the sound just mixes together and you can't really"
tell where anything is.
But it was very important to us to be able to see the sound.'
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- He brings him in, sort of dragging him, saying,'
"He decided he\'d run for it, but I caught him."'
And you can see that one of the kid's feet-- his foot"
was [INAUDIBLE] swollen up.
His toes were all big and purple.'
He\'s crying, looking at us, saying, "Please, help me.'
Please."
[END PLAYBACK]
So I was in Nepal for six months,'
and I started having very nightmarish dreams.'
And so I started recording them.
And so this piece uses three different dreams'
as a structure.
And they're all very bizarre dreams."
But then we made sounds that sort of go with it,'
and had a composer in Berlin work with us on it.'
Then in Kassel-- we had to create this sort of structure'
with narrative for the last piece,'
because we found that people couldn't-- or we"
couldn't-- remember-- it's a 30-minute piece."
And we couldn't really put together in a very nice way,"
aesthetically, the sounds from the beginning to the end'
to the middle.
So we had to sort of join it up with a kind of a sense'
of narrative to bring together.
But with this piece in the forest, we were able to do it,'
because you had this--
the content was a forest.
And I'll play you a little excerpt just so you can see."
There's 24 speakers recorded in Surround Sound."
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
And so half the time you don't know what's real in the forest."
And it's called A Short History, in ways,"
because it brings in-- we went to reconstructions of, say,'
like, a Napoleonic War--
[LAUGHING]
--where they shot muskets and recorded that.'
And we went to bomb sites where they're blowing up things"
and recorded that.
We had students in the university near where'
we lived go out into the forest and laugh for us'
and recorded in this technique called ambisonic.'
[END PLAYBACK]
So that's a piece--
a lot of these videos are on our YouTube,'
or on a Cardiff-Miller site if you want to see more.'
I just don't have the time today."
Because I want to get into a certain amount of themes.'
Because what we started discovering'
was that these pieces of equipment'
had a sense of anthropomorphic quality--'
that they became so physical that you started--'
like people, with Motet, would walk up to them.'
And they'd feel comfortable walking up to it."
But every speaker was a singer.
So I knew sort of who that singer was, and I'd"
recorded it.
I remember it because I'd been there recording."
But it became very interesting to me'
how much personality a speaker or an amplifier could have.'
I think this was 2003, just when Bush went into Iraq.'
We had a reproduction done of Jimi Hendrix.'
We had it scored, and then a really amazing guitarist'
play it with all the feedback and everything.'
So when you step on the pedal, you'
get the same kind of Jimi Hendrix feedback song.'
Does everybody know-- no, you probably don't."
Jimi Hendrix played the Star Spangled Banner'
with tons of feedback, against the Vietnam War,'
basically, as a protest.
And so we were using it in the same kind of way,'
as a protest in ways.
It's a very loud piece.
This is one of my favorite pieces.'
It's a very simple piece.
We found a set of slides in our basement'
that actually had been George's grandfather"
crossing the country.
And I just wanted to talk about this a bit,'
because it's about transversing through someone else's pictures"
a whole landscape.
And he never met his grandfather,'
but it came out that his grandfather, on this trip,'
was going from out west--
Calgary-- and then went a bit into BC, and then'
through the States to New York City,'
where there was a doctor he was going'
to be meeting for his cancer, which actually didn't cure him."
But this set of slides ended up being the story of it.'
But when we were looking at it, I set them up,'
and then we set up a recording head,'
and George and I sat and talked.
And we reproduced it by having George's voice coming out"
one side and my voice coming out another.'
And this piece had been intentioned to be just'
a part of a big installation.
And then when we actually replayed it,'
we realized we had something interesting.'
Because what happens is, it looks like the voices'
are controlling--
there's some slides of New York at the end."
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[PROJECTOR SHUFFLES]
It looks like the projector is being controlled'
by the voices, which is--
- Oh, I this-- this is Lake Superior.'
- Yeah, this one looks like Lake Superior.'
So it's just out of order.
- Yeah, but this--
- Because this is back in the mountains.'
One of the elk.
- [INAUDIBLE]
- And then this must be when he was hiking,'
because the mountain shape earlier--'
- Why would he have that one out of order?'
- I don't know.
- Because now we're back in the mountains."
Doesn't make sense.
It should go from the mountains to Calgary to the prairies.'
- This is sort of prairie.
- This looks like Northern Ontario to me.'
Because it's kind of a swampy wasteland"
- No, this is definitely a prairie shot, though.'
- This is badly organized.
[END PLAYBACK]
- So anyways, I wanted to show that just as--'
it was a way to do almost like a portrait of a collaboration--'
a couple.
And then we did another kind of portrait series, where'
we're talking about a film, and then we had two composers doing"
soundtracks--
composing, as we sort of described'
the film, a piece on the piano, and then we'
had a piano player play it back.
So you hear George and I describing this weird sci-fi'
alien zombie film, and then the piano player plays it.'
But we did a few musical instruments like this.'
And then this was actually our first--'
this is another kind of series that we work in,'
is almost theatrical Baroque.
And it's called The Dark Pool.
And it's in permanent installation in Dusseldorf"
at K21, if you're ever in Dusseldorf."
But it became our first official collaboration,'
because we couldn't remember whose idea it was."
And we're just kind of echoing how messy our studio was."
And we kind of enjoyed that.
So we just started adding things to it, and then adding sound,'
so it's censored sound as you walk around."
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[DOOR CREAKS]
[END PLAYBACK]
And then this is another piece in the genre, 10 years later,'
called Opera For a Small Room.
And we had the title about four years before we did the piece,'
because we liked that title.
And then we decided to create a situation'
where the record players were being played by the speaker.'
So it's kind of magical.
Because at one point, the record skips, and then the shadow'
moves in the room.
And it fixes the record player.
And another point where there's surround sound outside,"
and a train goes by, and the chandelier shakes.'
So it's all kind of these stage effects."
This is also kind of a reference to Krapp's Last Tape, which has"
always been an amazing play--
a Samuel Beckett play--
and I've always really enjoyed that."
And then the lighting changes, and at the end,'
it becomes a rock opera.
So it's actually a sad piece.
It's a 20-minute piece.
It's all about a man whose wife left,"
and something happened on the road.'
There was maybe an accident.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- In the middle of the stage--
- This is the beginning.
- --a man sits alone in a room, surrounded by speakers,'
turntables, and records.
[MUSIC PLAYS FROM RECORD]
She was walking down the road.
She was walking down the road with her shoes in her hand.'
Where the fuck was she going?
- Then he sings along.
[MAN SINGS ALONG WITH RECORD]
So it's kind of a funny portrait."
But at one point, all eight record players'
are playing opera songs together.'
It's just a crazy cacophony of opera."
And then this is another piece.
This came out right after all the photos of Abu Gharib--'
you know, the torture photos that hit all over the world,'
and the horrendous activities that were going on there.'
And at the same time, I was reading Kafka again,'
and read that in the penal colony--'
and it's about conceptual killing"
through bureaucratic punishment and killing.'
So we decided to create a killing machine'
that, you walk in and you press the button'
and it turns on the piece.
And it's a five-minute piece.
And at first we thought we'd have, like, eight robots,"
and they'd be all dancing.
And then we realized that robots were too hard to make'
and too hard to program.
So we ended up with two.
And then it changes the lighting,'
the dentist chair changes up and down,'
and it's got this weird fun fur on it"
that looks like it's kind of the color of blood."
And then a guitar gets hit.
There's different parts to it.
This series that we work on is very much'
a reference to theater.
It's kind of a hybrid between theater and performance art"
and between visual art.
I'll just show you a little bit, just until you get the idea."
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[MACHINES WHIRRING]
- Your left thumb [INAUDIBLE]
[END PLAYBACK]
- It's weird how they're very much like a lot of the sci-fi"
movies from the 90s and 2000s--
these robots moving around the field--'
like The Terminator.
And then at the end, of course, there's a mirrorball."
This is one of the musical pieces we made--'
a collection of our sound files.
When you open the drawer, you hear a little bit.'
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
- The furnace.
[END PLAYBACK]
It's just a couple more pieces I want to show,"
and then I think I'll wrap it up."
This one's over the top, but--
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[END PLAYBACK]
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, this piece, we decided to experiment in F-sharp minor.'
So we invited quite a few musicians into the studio,'
and said, "OK, why don\'t you go with this click track,'
and then play, doodle around, whatever you'
want to do in F-sharp minor?"
And then we mixed it all together so'
that we have 70-some speakers here, I think-- bare speakers.'
And I think there's four piano elements coming out."
And then there's a rock drum section and guitar in one area."
But we had them record for a loop of about two'
and a half minutes, so that the piece is mixed--'
sorry, I didn't tell you-- there's"
sensors around the table.
There is, I think, five sensors in each side,'
so that as you walk around, your shadow turns it on.'
So if there's one person in the room,"
you'll only hear a little bit.
And as you walk around the room--'
or if there's a couple people, you'll hear a lot."
And each sensor, once you move away from it,'
stays on for six seconds.
So it mixes with the other sounds,'
but it doesn't stay on unless you're there with it."
And then we had a little bit of sound effects, but mostly,'
it's--
let me see if I have some rock-n-roll up at the end.'
So if you move fast around it, you can--'
so basically, it's kind of like a DJ."
You can play it like a DJ table, almost, or something like that.'
Kind of a conceptual instrument.
And this was one of the crazy pieces that we've last made."
It is called The Marionette Maker.'
We've done a few pieces with marionettes and this idea"
of this little person who you endow'
with emotions and feelings, because they move.'
But this isn't me lying there.
It's actually a silicone replica of me."
We went to a company in Vancouver'
that does all sorts of stuff for Hollywood,'
and making bodies with heads that fall off'
and stuff like that.
And they cast me.
And there's George.
He's playing his guitar.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And there's a variety of all sorts of--"
I have a room in my studio that's called--"
my daughter calls it "toy torture area,"'
where I take apart toys and mix them with things.'
I've learned a lot through the idea of play"
with art, that it's so important."
And this piece, I think, is also inspired'
by the Calder circus, which I think is'
one of my favorite pieces ever.
We had a percussionist come in and recorded them.'
There's a little opera singer with the piano player."
This is the marionette maker.
He's sort of designing it all.
The story is kind of, maybe, that she's sleeping"
but she never wakes up.
She just ages.
But he's sitting there making marionettes"
as he's waiting for her to wake up."
[END PLAYBACK]
And then this is a piece that came afterwards,'
because the piano player wanted another role.'
And so that little piano player, actually--'
I don't know if this footage shows it very much,"
but he plays the whole piece--
the sad waltz and the dancer who couldn't dance."
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MACHINES WHIRRING]
This was shown in the Istanbul Biennale.'
Carolyn Kristof [INAUDIBLE] invited us, with a theme of--'
and so--
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The composition's by an Armenian composer, actually."
But the way we found it is we just wanted a sad waltz.'
And we looked on the internet for a sad waltz,'
and this is what came up.
And we love the music, so I built a little marionette.'
I find it a very sad piece.
Because of the way she's controlled."
Even though she's this big, she still becomes a little human."
[END PLAYBACK]
And this is the last piece.
And we can even just play while we talk.'
But it was made for--
they have a building at the Menil in Houston'
that they had a reproduction of the Byzantine chapel'
from Greece, and then it was empty.'
So now it's going to be their project space."
But we were the first in there.
And it's basically a big black box."
It was very tall.
So we just decided to make a big mobile.'
And we couldn't figure out what we wanted to work with."
We tried hanging a whole bunch of things.'
But everything we hung had meaning.'
And then-- I shouldn't say this, but George was in the bathtub,"
and he says, "Jan, what about mirrors?"'
I said, "Yeah, that\'s great."
Because mirrors have this sense of--'
we found all these antique mirrors,'
and you think about how they've been"
looked into by so many people, and where they've come from."
People from all over the world have traveled as immigrants'
and brought their mirrors.
And then the soundtrack is actually'
recordings from outer space from NASA.'
And we have it on a program that's"
a random program that changes the lighting and the sound,'
so that sometimes the sound of going past Saturn'
and then sometimes the sound of past Earth or one of the moons.'
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[LOUD HUMMING]
And then sometimes the lighting changes.'
But we can just turn the audio down a bit.'
This piece has to have a very high space to show in.'
So there's not many spaces it can show."
But there's a cathedral in Amsterdam"
that wants us to do a piece, so we're"
thinking of maybe making it a bit bigger'
and showing it there.
Might be really nice.
I'm sure some of the mirrors already came from Amsterdam."
It's called The Infinity Machine,"
because in the center of the piece,'
there's a couple mirrors facing each other."
So I think that's the last piece I'm going to show."
So I think we're going to have a few questions."
But thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]
And that was the speed version.
- Very good, very good, very good.'
Can we turn the lights on, maybe,'
so that we can actually see you, and maybe'
turn the sound down a bit?
Thank you.
So one thing, for those of you who are new,'
is that, at the end of the lectures,'
we have some questions.
And even though you haven't rehearsed this,"
it would be great if we could invite'
you to ask Janet some questions about what she presented--'
- I have a question.
- Where are you?
- Right here.
- OK.
Hello.
Hi.
- Hi.
Thank you.
That was so delightful.
And I just want to add that it was particularly'
delightful to hear you describe some of the works'
that I've experienced before--
speaking of memory.
And part of that is that I also love learning from your work.'
And it's your facility with layering,"
and yet the fullness of experience'
that results in that--
the fullness of all the operations through the body.'
So the first question I have is about spaces'
that are bad for sound, and if you could describe that more,'
because that, to me, sounds like a frontier of work--'
that there is no space that is bad for sound,'
but you have to learn how to choreograph and how to operate.'
And the second question is about--'
- Do you mean interior spaces, or, like, natural spaces?'
- You described, I think-- they were interior spaces--'
some of the spaces that you pointed out that were bad'
for sound.
But maybe there were some that I missed.'
And the second question is, how high do these mirrors'
have to be hung?
Because I have a great idea for where they could go.'
- I forget how high it is, actually.'
But it's about this high.
Yeah, it's about this high.
- It's about eight meters.
- About eight meters, yeah.
But with sounds in space--
it's interesting how we get invited"
to some of these spaces--
like, even with landscape architects.'
We've been invited to do a few projects,"
and we will generally find it a bit difficult. Because usually,'
landscape architects get to work around, say, harbor fronts,'
or something like that, where they'
want the space re-activated.
But it's already a busy space, and there's usually"
a highway next to it.
So we've never actually completed a project"
with any of the projects there.
But the last one we were invited to'
was described as this nice, little, old alcove'
of very ancient olive trees.
And we get there and there's a highway right next to it."
And we're going, like, you can't do the speaker piece here."
Because you're constantly thinking about the traffic"
going by and you can't.
So it's really hard with spaces.
For Motet, natural light is really nice.'
And the best space I think it's ever shown"
is the Cloisters in New York City.'
It showed at four different places in New York City,'
including the MOMA in PS1.
And p.s.
PS1 was nice, because there's a wall"
of windows all the way around.
So as you're listening, you're looking at the city."
And the strange thing was that it actually--'
we had a show booked to go to New York right as 9/11'
happened--
for PS1.
And so the Motet was there.
And we didn't think the show would actually get"
through customs, but it did.
And it was mounted so that people could stand'
there and look at the city.
And it was just one of these emotive things.'
So I think, yeah, natural light is really good.'
But the hardest materials are the hardest.'
And the Cloisters was so good, because churches'
are designed for singers.
They're designed to have the voices go up to heaven"
and become angels.
So the stone has all these pockmarks.'
And so acoustically, that's fantastic."
Because you can still hear someone'
talking 10 feet away from you.
But start thinking about, when you're going around"
to different buildings, and seeing if you and your friend'
can hear each other from three yards away.'
But I think your body takes in everything'
about a space unconsciously.
So it's really amazing what you guys are doing."
So it's a very hard problem, though, too,"
working with materials, but at the same time'
being sensitive to how it is.
Because even a sense of the rawness of the brick'
here, and--
actually, I'm not going to go into this,"
because that's your specialty.
Thank you for the question.
- Thank you.
So to the extent that you're comfortable,"
I was wondering if you could talk about your relationship'
with your partner, and how and if'
you create a separation in your life between your work and--'
- That that's an interesting question."
Because not many artists who are also married can work together.'
But it just started out really easily.'
And he's not a man with a lot of ego, which really helped,"
because for a while he gave up his practice'
to edit my audio walks, because it'
became very busy with audio walks for awhile.'
But he wouldn't even take credit for them."
Now do everything.
But I think if you work as a team--'
I think it helps I grew up in a farm, and the idea'
that everybody has to contribute.'
And you just sort of help out and it seems to work.'
But when we cook dinner--
I like the sort of metaphor of working together'
is like making a meal together, because I somehow just'
automatically go do this, and then he does this.'
And somehow we just work around each other.'
And we don't talk about it too much."
I'm not very good technically.
And I've become, as I mentioned, less and less so."
Because he has this kind of genius'
to be able to see any problem and to want'
to fix it or figure it out.
Like if he needs to learn to program for it,'
he'll learn to program for it, whereas I'd just"
go, "Oh, I\'m just going to hire somebody'
for that," or something.
Or, "How do I do this, George?," and he\'ll figure it out.'
But when either of us comes up with an idea,'
it's really good, because you still"
have to watch how you respond to that idea.'
Like, you can\'t say, like, "Oh, that is so goofy.'
How could you ever think of that?"'
Or like, "That is, like, blech."
You might think that, but you have'
to still watch saying, "Well, I don\'t think so."'
But we're pretty blunt with each other."
And he's an editor that I trust.
Like I've written some really bad script."
And sometimes it gets past him.
But usually he goes and crosses it out.'
I have this whole collection of post-it notes'
I came across that\'s like, "This is so corny.'
You can\'t write this."
That sort of thing.
Maybe I'm telling too much.
- Do you see your relationship as an undercurrent'
in any of your work?
Or have you taken that on as the subject'
of any particular piece?
- Well, the road trip that I showed you,'
I ended up editing the audio.
Because we had all this raw audio of us talking about these'
slides and how I'd put them in the wrong order"
and everything like that.
So I edited out parts that made me sound bad.'
But that's the only piece, I think,"
that's really become about us, in terms"
of showing how we work together, and how we relate, and saying,'
he is a different type of thinker.'
For the Venice piece, when we were editing that,'
I did a lot of rough cuts.
Like, I'll throw things together."
And then he'll do the fine tuning."
But then he's a really, really good editor."
So then he'll find things.
And then I'll say, well, what about this?"
So we seem to really bounce.
We're really different.
And he works kind of night shift,'
and I work morning shift.
So we have enough time separate that when we come together,'
it actually works.
And we both really trust each other.'
He doesn't like going to museums."
He doesn't like looking at art.
He likes going to dance performances.'
But I love going to museums and looking at old paintings'
or looking at whatever.
We both love reading.
And I think a lot of this stuff comes from reading.'
But I don't know really why it works."
But we also have a very strong relationship.'
And we were, like, 20 and 23 when we got together, so we've"
sort of grown together.
- Hi--
- Not that it's all just roses.
- Hi, thank you for the talk.
I thought it was really--
oh, sorry.
- Hi
- Hello.
First, I want to say how disarming it'
is to hear your voice in person, because it's"
such a thread through the work, this kind'
of calm, sensible, yet commanding voice.'
But I'm wondering, what's interesting about experiencing"
your work often is, sometimes you disperse the audience,'
or you isolate an audience member, or unify them.'
Like, some of your work, one feels'
very antagonized by other members of the audience.'
And other times, you feel very unified.'
Like with Forty-Part Motet at the Cloisters,'
people were crying.
It becomes a very kind of powerful experience.'
So I'm wondering how you strategize towards an intended"
audience, or respond to how an audience is'
engaging with your work?
- Can you expand a little bit more on that?'
- Given how active I found the other members of the audience'
to be in terms of your work, like Opera For a Small Room,'
or I remember seeing Killing Machine in Miami,'
and everyone was just like, "What do we do?'
We pressed the button and now we're fucked."
How do we deal with that?"
But I don't know how you would predict"
that, or a set of responses by the audience,'
as you're kind of constructing or imagining the work."
And I'm wondering how maybe an audience response would"
shape the work or guide your sensibility'
towards other works.
- Well with the walks, they're quite"
different than the installations.'
Because it's really essential that we don't frustrate people"
too much and lose them.
So we always have test cases.
We do the rough edit first, and then we get a few test cases.'
Different people.
Some curators, some writers, some artists.'
Because artists are much better at finding their ways around'
than writers or curators.
But if people end up walking--
when I record, sometimes, I record on site.'
But other times-- I'm always recording the footsteps"
on site.
And I tend to walk with shorter footsteps than someone who's"
listening.
So then there's all this whole ergonomic of--"
George actually goes on site with his laptop'
now, and edits while listening to it, so that most times,'
you have to take out about 10 footsteps.'
Because as you're walking, you're hearing my breathing,"
and you're hearing the footsteps."
And it's so much part of the piece"
that the audience and the sound are me,'
kind of like a virtual me mix.
And so that you don't want to have them always way lost,"
or not thinking syncing up with when there's a building"
that I say, "Oh, look at that cement wall.'
It\'s got a big hole in it," or something.'
And it's nice they share.
Because I think it's about this sense of intimacy and sharing."
When I first started doing the audio walks,'
there was a lot of dialogue about how the Walkman was'
alienating people, which is kind of funny dialogue'
now with all the iPhones and iPods.'
And then when we did the audio walks,'
we realized that people would come back'
and they'd say, oh, I see way more doing this"
than I ever saw.
So it wasn't canceling the vision."
But it was also making them feel really intimate with somebody'
and sharing with somebody, which I thought'
was kind of interesting.
So, did I answer that enough?
- Yeah.
Sure.
Thank you.
- It's a complex question, because the audience"
is very important for a lot of the works.'
- Hello.
I think that was a really great lecture.'
- Thank you.
- Thank you very much.
What I'm interested to hear from you is how you relate yourself"
in the early walks you were doing'
to marionette in the later ones.
Because I find it interesting how you earlier'
described with the first question'
that your body reacts to the environment, but yet,'
in the walks, the people listening to it'
are disembodied in yourself.
And then when watching the performance'
pieces and the theatrical pieces at the end,'
you're almost embodying the marionette as an emotion,"
and how you can kind of relate those two'
parts of your project.
- Well, I've never thought about that."
That's a very interesting thought."
Thank you.
Yeah.
The walks-- the funny thing is, too, when I first started them,'
there were some dialogue about power and control.'
And then some people--
there was actually one critic that wrote, "Well,'
I don't like this sense of control--"
being told where to go. 'Turn left here,' and, 'Turn right"
there,\' like a marionette."
And some of the walks-- like, the Carnegie one was actually'
based on this idea of the voice--'
I had a Matrix character--
before The Matrix-- come on.
And he was like a scientist treating the people'
like they were walking within a maze,'
so that they were like mice.
So there is that kind of weird conflict'
between being controlled by the marionette maker, who'
is myself and George.
So-- where was I going with that?'
Shit.
Maybe you can add to this.
I had a really good point I was trying to go for there.'
It's kind of like that game as a kid, when you're blindfolded"
and you're led around.
There's a certain-- it's not an S&M kind of thing,"
but it's a certain kind of giving up your power."
It's enjoyable to give up your power"
and get into this idea of play.
So there were some people that had a problem with it,'
but most people liked to be led, and like to get into this idea'
that it is play, and like to line up.'
And also, what I've found is, I was"
surprised that so many people liked to behave.'
They really want to line up and make sure everything works.'
And that's why there's-- in The Playhouse--"
and I think you saw The Playhouse, didn't you?"
In Miami.
There's one point where the audience around you--"
which I recorded in a lecture hall'
when I gave a lecture once--
they start to laugh at the singer.'
And people said that made them so uncomfortable,'
because, you know, you're not supposed to do that."
So we do play with different things that'
do make people feel very uncomfortable,'
and sometimes, too, even the intimacy.'
Like with my voice, I keep it so it's very neutral."
So it sort of just goes into you, like thoughts, hopefully--'
especially with women, more so.
But there is a sense of intimacy there'
that can get a little creepy.
So it's a hard thing to work with."
So I think that's a very interesting comment you made."
- Janet, thank you so much.
You know, what I think is so apt in terms'
of your presentation and seeing the work,'
and then hearing you talk about it, in a way, is--'
and I think it's so relevant in the context of the school--"
is that, constantly, people are dealing with'
the inter-relationship between creativity--'
like having some interesting ideas--'
and the implementation of that, through the concept'
of preparation.
A lot of the things that you are discussing tonight'
is really how you prepare, what you'
need to go through in order for work to sort of happen.'
And I think in the school, this is a really important thing.'
Like, how are you constructing the conditions for preparation,'
in a way, to occur?
Because there are lots of creative people.'
But actually the relationship between those sort of ideas'
and the circumstances of realization, I think,'
are really important.
And I really thank you.
- Can I add one point on this?
- Yeah, yeah.
Sure, sure, sure.
- You just made me think of it.
Because with architects, so often, you're"
asked for a design concept.
There's all the famous stories about designs"
on, like, napkins.
But one of the things-- some artists'
are able to totally pre-conceptualize something.'
With George and I, it's never like that."
We can pre-conceptualize something,'
and then it completely changes.
And for us, one of the main things we had to learn'
was to follow the peripheral.
Because usually your first idea, or the main idea, is bad.'
It's kind of the most obvious, or something."
And your intuition and your unconscious can come at it.'
And it's like lying in the bathtub sometimes."
An idea does come.
Or when you're playing around in the studio"
and then you discover something by a material that'
goes together.
Or my daughter will do something,'
and I go, like, wow, that's really cool."
You know, that sort of thing.
I think for us, that's the most important thing in our art"
practice, to be open to whatever happens.'
But with architecture, you can't do that."
- Yeah, but what a lot of people in this room are doing'
are actually also not that.
Because I think that the exciting thing'
about the programs--
if you're dealing with questions of conservation--"
that's what I was saying to you earlier--"
you're dealing with aspects of memory"
and you do that installation, and suddenly, there'
is the appearance of the space, but there is also'
the memory of that space, and what'
actions do you take in order for that'
to be something simultaneously contemporary'
and, at the same time, it has a kind of history,'
or a kind of historicity?
And I think in all the programs, there are different ways.'
Because you're using technology.
I mean, you're talking about art. but. actually,"
you're talking about technology, in a way,"
and the relationship of technology'
to questions of representation, and how we kind of relate those'
to everyday life.
So what I think is so positive is that if you take'
any one of our programs, actually there'
is a way to make a connection with your work, which I found'
normally that doesn't happen.
So that's actually very exciting."
So anyway, thank you very much.
Thank you all very much for coming.'
And I hope you've had a good day."
[APPLAUSE]
