Hi, everyone.
Thanks for coming.
So tonight's lecture marks the conclusion"
of women and designs events celebrating'
International Women's Day.
The focus has been feminine power'
sidestepping the normative assumptions about what'
success and agency look like within the design fields'
and instead searching for alternative ways'
to understand power.
Events circled around three themes--'
feminist epistemologies in design,'
foreground women's work, and workshopping"
emergent practices.
We strove together members from our own GSD community'
to celebrate and cultivate new ways of thinking'
about gender and power.
Tonight's lecture is no exception."
Women in Design is delighted to welcome'
Beatrice Colomina to our school as the concluding keynote'
speaker.
Beatrice is professor of history and theory'
in the School of Architecture and founding director'
of the program in Media and Modernity'
at Princeton University.
She has written extensively on questions of architecture, art,'
sexuality, and media.
Her books include Are We Human, Notes'
on an Archeology of Design, i Century'
of the Bed, Manifesto Architecture-- the Ghost'
of Mies, Clip Stamp, Fold, Domesticity at War, Privacy'
and Publicity, Modern Architecture's Mass Media,"
and Sexuality and Space.
She has curated a number of exhibitions including'
Clip Stamp Fold in 2006, Playboy Architecture in 2012,'
and Radical Pedagogies in 2014.
She was curator with Mike Quigley of the third Istanbul'
Design biennial in 2016.
She has been the recipient of diverse awards and fellowships'
including the Samuel H Cress Senior'
Fellowship at the Center for Advanced Studies in the Visual'
Arts, SOM Foundation, La Corbusier Foundation, Grant'
Foundation, the Canadian Center for Architecture,'
the American Academy in Berlin, and the Getty'
Center in Los Angeles.
Tonight we welcome her as an authority'
on gender and sexuality in the built environment.'
Some of the seeds of today's intense and immersive"
conversations, especially in the GSD,'
can be found in her work, particularly'
Sexuality and Space from 1992.
I would have loved to have gone to the conference,'
but I was three, and of which she was the editor.'
In it, we can learn that the politics of space'
are always sexual.
Architecture must be thought of as a system of representation'
in the same way that we think of drawings, photographs, models,'
film, or television, not only because architecture'
is made available to us through the media,'
but because the built object is itself'
a system of representation.
Likewise the body has to be understood'
as a political construct, a product of such systems'
of representation rather than the means by which we encounter'
them.
We here now find our interests and intentions'
in this particular moment shifting.'
We accept that architecture is a system of representation'
but of whom and by whom.
We accept the body as inherently political,'
but who's calling the shots here?"
We pull back the veil to shift our gaze'
from architecture as object to architecture as practice.'
Tonight's lecturer is framed thusly with and not"
and is the way in which women are usually'
credited alongside men in the official records'
if they're credited at all.
Women are the ghosts of modern architecture,'
everywhere present crucial, but strangely invisible.'
Architecture is deeply collaborative,'
more like movie making than traditional visual art.'
But unlike movies, this is hardly ever acknowledged.'
Until recently, it's been a secret carefully guarded."
So tonight, we make space to represent'
that which has been previously rendered invisible.'
Please welcome Beatrice Colomina.'
Thank you very much for your generous introduction'
and for your invitation.
It makes me really, really happy to be invited here precisely'
by the women in design.
Not that Harvard has ever been not generous to me.'
One of the first lectures--
I was just mentioning--
this I gave it here when I was absolutely nobody.'
And not that I'm anybody now, but I was absolutely nobody,"
like totally a kid in '86 I think."
I started to work on my dissertation.'
I gave three lectures here in this very room.'
They're very much the beginning of my thinking of what"
could become privately and publicly'
the modern architecture mass media.'
And even if I didn't have the title or anything like that,"
I did, but I have always enjoyed coming here and discussing'
things with you.
So the question of collaboration, of course,'
has become I think an increasingly'
important and urgent, you can say, question.'
On the one hand, you can say that it's"
central to contemporary discussions in general'
of architecture.
If you want ever deeper engagement with SEER software'
programs that allow a large number'
of people in different locations and disciplines'
to work together on the same project.'
On the other hand, I think it's also"
crucial to historians trying to understand'
the way in which architecture has been traditionally'
produced.
Architecture is increasingly a collaborative field.'
We all know that, and yet it has been'
very difficult to acknowledge this simple fact to architects.'
It's much more difficult than Phil."
Phil has always recognized these.'
Why are we so stuck up with this question?'
At the end of a film, you have-- even the makeup people,'
the hair people, the catering people are credited.'
And we credit nobody.
I mean, we were out of their way to credit just one person even'
in situations like, for example--'
and this is pertinent to the women in design in Harvard'
that they started that famous and really urgent petition'
to acknowledge Denise Scott Brown as part of the Pritzker'
Prize.
And it was still denied.
How is it possible that an architectural firm acknowledge'
in their name Denise Scott Brown and institution'
has said the Pritzker Prize decided that that's irrelevant."
And this is I think some of the things'
that we need to think about.
And precisely I was going to start with this question'
that you just read the paragraph of how women'
in architecture and in general--
this is an alternative title--
the with and without you, the growth of modern architecture.'
Because in fact with and not and is precisely the way in which'
women architects are more frequently'
credited alongside men in the official records.'
And that is if they are credited at all.'
And this is a woman builder in 903'
repairing the roof of the city hall in Berlin.'
So women had been in architecture'
for a very, very long time.
It's just we don't see them.
In that sense, I say that women are the ghosts'
of modern architecture.
Here is a ghost for example.
This is photograph of the Barcelona Pavilion'
There are very few photographs of the Pavilion.'
Has anybody bothered to ask themselves,'
who is this woman standing at the edge of the carpet looking'
into the Barcelona Pavilion.
Of course it's Lily Reich, that not only collaborated"
with Mies van der Rohe in the pavilion,'
but she was the one that was there the whole time where'
he kept going to Berlin.
And so, she's not only that.
She did more than 23 exhibitions in industrial exhibitions seen'
in Barcelona at the same time that they'
did they the pavilion-- a fantastic exhibit'
and she was crucial to the Barcelona Pavilion.'
But we still continue to say about Barcelona Pavilion'
of Mies van der Rohe of course.
And the pavilion has not been inaugurated,'
and she's inspecting the setup.
So women are the ghosts of modern architecture.'
This is a self portrait of a Lotte Beese.'
And this is a photograph of Otti Berger, a Bauhaus student who'
actually dying at a concentration'
camp and a photograph of Lotte Beese.'
Also, we don't know enough about all these women"
that were part of the Bauhaus.
And when the Bauhaus, the tragic stories of many of these--'
all these remains to be undone.
But returning to the question of the ghost--'
and I guess I put this picture because it suggests this idea'
of the ghosts because women are really the ghost of modern'
architecture--
everywhere pressing, crucial, but strangely invisible,'
unacknowledged.
I think they are destined to haunt the field forever.'
But correcting the record is not just a question'
of adding a few names or even thousands'
to the history of architecture.
It's not just a matter of human justice or historical accuracy,"
but a way to more fully understand architecture'
and the complex ways in which it is produced.'
Architecture is deeply collaborative,'
more like movie making than visual arts for example'
but unlike all traditional visual arts at least.'
But unlike movies, this is hardly ever acknowledged.'
Until recently it has been a secret carefully guarded.'
So I guess what I'm conjuring is this idea that we are going"
to get very far by simply adding women architects to the history'
of modern architecture.
What do we have to rethink fundamentally'
is the question of how architecture is being produced'
and the privileging of one single figure'
that we continue to--
to [inaudible] our problem.
That's what I'm trying to say.
I'm not saying that it's not important to do"
a specific exercise of women that has not been acknowledged.'
I'm just saying with this, we will not get very far."
To better understand the field of architecture,'
I think we liberate new potential.'
The gap between the words and and with,'
which as you will see, institutions so vigilantly'
guard, needs to be rethought.
With implies a helper, a secondary source of energy,'
and implies partnerships and equality.'
What is positive about the and is'
that it feeds on difference and complexity'
and may encourage more and may encourage more nuanced forms'
of production and discourse.
And I will tell you a story of how'
I got into this whole question of the collaboration.'
It's almost 20 years ago, and I was invited"
to give a lecturer in Madrid.
And by the way, Madrid is incidentally'
the place where I was--
the city where I was born.
It was kind of an interesting occasion'
because, by then, as I was already'
a professor at Princeton, I have lectured everywhere-- at Yale,'
at Harvard, at Princeton, etc.
at the [inaudible].
I don't know.
But you know, you never are anybody in your own country.'
So finally, they decided that maybe I was worth their while.'
And the Colegio de Arquitectos, which'
is very much a male kind of completion institute,'
and they invited me to give a lecture there.'
And I was working at that time.
So for those of you who know my work--'
not that it's way in my career--
I was working on Charles and Ray Eames at the time.'
So I gave this lecture on the work of Charles and Ray Eames,'
and particularly I was working on the Eames House.'
And to my surprise, most of the discussion at the dinner'
afterwards centered on the role of Ray's background"
as a painter, how he studies with Hans Hofmann.'
They knew everything.
So of course, I have mentioned, when'
I was showing images of the house,'
how the Hans Hofmann paintings were hanging horizontally'
from the ceiling and how Ray had a study with Hans Hofmann.'
But otherwise, I had not really focused on the role of Ray.'
I had not brought up to this theme at all.'
And I was also surprised that they brought this question,'
that they were so interested in the significance of Ray'
in the partnership because I was surrounded by very, very'
well-known Spanish architects, some of whom'
even teach around here.
But they were all men.
There was not even a woman on the table and also,'
because as I say, I had not brought'
the subject of Ray's contribution"
at all in the lecture.
I had thought it was not a climate or an interest'
or an audience for that kind of topic in Spain at that time.'
The conversation drifted as usually'
happens in this occasion.
And before we know, we are talking about Lily Reich'
and what enormous, massive roles she'
might have played in development of Mies van'
der Rohe's architecture.
They were saying about the importance'
of such products of the Silk and Velvet Cafe'
in Berlin, the collaborative project of Mies'
with Lily Reich for the Exposicion de la'
Mode in Berlin in 1927, when draperies in velvet and silk'
hang from metal rods to form the space.'
And everyone, to my surprise, agreed that there was nothing,'
nothing in Mies work previous to that collaboration'
with Lily Reich that will suggest this radical definition'
of a space, by, let's say, suspended"
surfaces, which could become actually'
his trademark, as exemplified of course in the Tugendhat'
and the Barcelona Pavilion of 1929.'
Of course, Stoney's because where"
I have always thought that was obvious,'
I had never brought myself--
I mean, I have said things like these in seminars,'
but I have never brought myself to write something like that,'
that they were also aware of this incredible influence'
of Lily Reich.
And then one these famous architects say something that'
has stayed with me ever since.
He says it is like a dirty little secret'
that we-- that is, we, meaning all architects-- keep,'
something that we all know, that we all see,'
but we don't bring ourselves to talk about it."
That's amazing.
So these guys are all guys, are controlling'
the entire situation in Spain, the schools of architecture,'
the institute-- they know, they see,'
they are in a kind of spontaneous situation'
after dinner, able to talk about it.'
But as he himself admitted-- and I'
thought it was really beautiful that he will say it that way--'
that this is like a little, dirty secret that we all know,'
that we all see.
So in fact, that made me think that the secrets'
of modern architecture are really'
like the secrets of a family, in which, of course,'
everybody knows that something has happened,'
but nobody wants to talk about it, all this little secret.'
And it is perhaps because of our current culture fascination'
with exposing the intimate, that these secrets have not'
been unveiled little by little.
They wanted to adjust the publication of recent years'
or even of recent days.
There is an increasing interest on the way'
in which architectural works, so to speak.'
It is as if we have become more concerned with the'
how than with the what.
And how is less about structure or building techniques,'
which was of course the interest of an earlier'
generation of historians, and more'
about interpersonal relations.
The previous marginal details of how things actually'
happen in architecture practice are now coming into the light.'
The focus is shifting from the architect as a single figure'
and the building as an object to architecture as collaboration.'
This for example is Charles Eames with John Entenza.'
But how can anybody think about Charles Eames and his Eames'
House without thinking about Entenza, that was,'
of course the great promoter of all the cases'
studies in California?
So collaborations are multiple and complex.'
Attention is today starting to be'
paid to all professionals that are involved in the project--'
the partners, the engineers, the landscape architects,'
the interior designers, the employees, the builders, etc.,'
even photographers, graphic designers, critiques, curators.'
He's more of a curator than a critic."
And all of those who produce the work in the media'
are being considered.
It's no longer possible to ignore"
how much modern architecture is produced both in the media'
and as media.
And these, of course, are the famous photographs'
of Julius Shulman of the Richard Neutra House on Palmer Street,'
or the Pierre Koenig house.
Without these pictures, the work will not exist.'
As Richard Neutra himself said about his photographer Julius'
Shulman and Julius Shulman, he was a kid'
when Richard Neutra hired him.
He was a fashion photographer.
He had no idea how to photograph architecture.'
He trained him.
But then he says, this work will always survive me.'
Film is stronger, and glossy prints'
are easier to see than brute concrete, stainless steel,'
or even ideas.
So he acknowledged the significance of this work.'
Today, even the clients, who were previously'
treated as a problem for architecture or as witness'
to the effects of architecture, are being considered'
as the active collaborators.
They are, as for example, in Farnsworth, the famous doctor'
in Chicago and client of the Farnsworth House of Mies.'
So of course, many of the best work of architecture'
owe their strength to the client.'
And this is something that, of course,'
Alice Friedman studied very well.'
The post-war inaugurated a new kind of-- here'
you have, for example, Alice in the office of Mies'
actively working with Mairon Goldschmitt'
in the design of her own House.
The post-war period inaugurated a new kind'
of collaborative practice that has become increasingly'
difficult to ignore or to subsumed'
between a heroic conception of an individual figure.'
MOMA, for example, held this exhibition on the Chiga firm,'
SOM--
Skidmore, Owings, and Merrill--
in 1950 acknowledging him for the first time'
a corporate office.
So here we have individuals giving way'
to a more anonymous collective, even in the exhibition of 1950.'
But when finally the names are put--'
this is the cover of the catalog--'
when the names are finally written,'
then symptomatically a very significant woman'
in the firm, Natalie de Blois, was systematically left out.'
So when they have to put all the names,'
all the male names appear, but Natalie de Blois,'
who was actually the great architect'
of all these projects-- the LeBer House,'
the Pepsi Build, the Hilton International in Istanbul,'
she is never acknowledged to the point that, at a certain point,'
she left the firm.
She was never promoted, et cetera.'
I brought this Fortune magazine because I'
think we are worse architects, as the institution'
of architecture are worse than the popular press'
because here you see Fortune magazine that'
has no trouble acknowledging that Natalia de Blois is'
the senior designer that did the preliminary drawings'
for the Union Carbide Tower, et cetera.'
And here she is with Phillip Johnson and Mario Salvadori.'
And you see that Phillip Johnson knows perfectly well who'
she's dealing with.
But the firm itself would never fully acknowledge her,'
and MOMA did not include her in the credit either.'
Actually, in this period of the post-war year,'
all the great masters associated for the first time'
with other architectural on key projects-- for example,'
Mies van der Rohe worked with Philip Johnson on the Seagram'
Building, was the crucial intervention'
as client of Phyllis Lambert as both patron'
and the own architect.
That was Phillip Lambert that convinced her father, Seagram,'
that wanted to hire a very conventional architect'
that Mies will do the building.
So again, the Seagram Building will not'
exist without Phyllis Lambert.
In 1943, Walter Gropius founded the architect collaborative'
tadt with a group of young architects.'
And in 1963, he collaborated with the corporate office'
of Emery Roth and Sons for the Pan Am building.'
Many other examples--
Wallace Harrison is told, if you want, from the corpus here,'
the forms for the new headquarters of the United'
Nations in New York.
Rem Koolhaas has actually suggested'
that such partnerships are always overlooked,'
even they often contribute the more idiosyncratic features'
of the buildings.
Here still is the United Nations.'
And Koolhaas' point is that those of the perversion"
of the masters.
From the 1930s Koolhaas wrote in 1996,'
when he began working with Lily Reich,'
on Mies left the theatrical to others-- perversoin by proxy'
from her silk and velvet to Johnson's chain mail in the"
in the fourth Seasons.
What is the connection?
Who took advantage?
Once again, it's symptomatic to me"
that it takes an architect and not a critic or a historian'
to point to the obvious, even if in fact he'
gets the facts wrong, Lily Reich having being collaborating'
Mies since the mid 20s.
But the question is the question of collaboration'
is what he gets right.
Collaborations, to return to the initial point,'
is the secret life of modern architecture, the secret life'
of architects, in a way, the domestic cultural life'
of architecture.
And nowhere is this more evident than in architects'
who live and work together.
With couples for whom there's a complete identification"
between home life and office life--'
precisely, I think the sensitivity Koolhaas'
to the question of collaboration is'
also personal or autobiographical in as much'
as OMA was also two couples.
And of course, there is Zada Hadid, that at some point'
joined the office only for one year, who was terribly unhappy'
and actually, in this collage, it's also interesting"
that this is practically at the door in a I'm leaving,"
two you guys can.
So of course, Madelon Vriesendorp, Rem Koolhaas,'
and Elia Zenghelis and Zoe.
Zenghelis were part of the practice.'
And many times, at least in the initial years--'
I haven't been heard him complaining so much recently--"
he complained in the early years so much'
that, despite the huge effort of naming his practice'
Office of Metropolitan Architecture,'
the press tended to prefer only one name.'
So they will continue to talk about Rem Koolhaas'
and not about OMA and not acknowledging'
fully the rest of the partners.
So as I say, nowhere is this more emblematic'
that with architects that work and to live together'
with couples for whom there's a complete identification"
between home life and office life.'
Ray and Charles Eams in the 1950s'
provided actually a model for couplings'
in following generations.
By couplings, I mean collaborations in which'
there is also some intimate relationship, in particular'
for Alison and Peter Smithson, whose partnership in turn'
provided a model for Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown,'
believe it or not, and for Enric Miralles and Carme Pinos'
a generation later.
So a couple in a way identifying themselves with other couple.'
These guys were absolutely obsessed with the Smithsons,'
whom they had made when they were very young kids studying'
in Urbino Urbino was a school in Italy, a summer school, where'
students from different parts of school of architecture'
all over Europe will go there for two months with Giancarlo'
De Carlo.
And they found themselves with the Smithsons teaching there,'
and they formed a longtime relationship.'
The couplings actually reached an enormous level'
of resentment and nervousness from all camps,'
and that includes women.
The phallic myth of the solo architect, the isolated genius,'
is one of the most regressive and reactionary understanding'
of architecture.
But unfortunately it's still the more pervasive."
In this climate, I think there is'
much to learn from the Smithson's if only to remind"
ourselves that it took more than half'
a century before women architects were'
on equal footing in partnership with man.'
Margaret McDoland collaborated with Charles Rennie Mackintosh,'
Lily Reich with Meis, Charlotte Perriand,'
with Le Corbusier, Aino Aalto with Alvar Aalto.'
But their extraordinary influences'
was never completely acknowledged.'
Only Charles and Ray Eames, we did'
for the first time have a firm, which at least in the name,'
would recognize the two partners as equals.'
And only with the Smithsons did we have that'
a woman puts her name first and her work is finally'
fully acknowledged by all.
Of course, institutions, particularly eastcoast'
institutions, I must say-- the Museum of Modern Art, the New'
York Times, Harvard University, I'm sorry, were in denial."
A devastated Esther McCoy wrote to the Eams apologizing'
for an article that had just appeared in the New York Times'
where the name of Ray had been erased from the article.'
And she says, Dear Charles and Ray, the Times story'
was an embarrassment to me, as it'
must have been painful to you.
It was originally, as requested, a 5,000 story'
and was cut, at their request, to 3,500.'
And when Paul Goldberger, he called and said it was fine.'
Then he turned me over to an editorial assistant,'
and Barbara Williams, who had endless complaints--'
I won't bore you, but the two things"
we settled down on a death struggle--'
death struggle-- were that Ray's name must be included."
Imagine that you have to fight for that,'
that Ray's must be included and that a [inaudible] must not"
be called a casting couch.
For 20 years, of course the article appears'
and Ray has disappeared and [inaudible] is called a casting'
couch, right?
For 20 years, I have worked faithfully with editors.'
Now already in 1973, I have come up against two editors--'
he's 73--
who are unbelievably arrogant, the basis of their complaint'
being that I don't understand the broad audience."
This is sheer nonsense.
The broad audience does not object to a woman'
being credited for work.
So this is the kind of thing that critics like Esther McCoy'
had to deal with.
But I mean, if the New York Times was terrible,'
the Museum of Modern Art was even worse,'
they never were able to acknowledge Ray Eams.'
Only Charles was credited in the institutions for the exhibition'
of their work.
One that presented that as one man saw'
and the title, new furniture designed'
by Charles Eames in 1946.
Now this is particularly tragic because older members'
of the Eams office were also not credited for their work,'
including-- and you see the whole team there--'
Gregory Aime, Coliver Toya, Herbert Matter,'
and Griswold Raphael.
And all of them resigned from the office as a consequence.'
So MOMA may have thought that they were doing something very'
nice by credited only Charles, but it'
had enormous consequences for the firm'
because this was one of the more, actually,'
fruitful and productive moments of the office.'
And they all left.
And the relationship was even personal.'
You have, for example, here Alexander Matter'
who was the son of Herbert Matter,'
and was also here on top of this plywood elephant.'
So there an intimate and also personal relationship.'
And all of this was sent to garbage by this stupidity.'
The exhibition-- sorry-- the exhibition and catalogue'
of the good design exhibitions of the 1950s,'
where also Charlers and Ray Ears were a part,'
did not again give credit to Ray,'
who is in fact seen in many photographs installing'
the saw next to the creator, Edward Hofmann Jr.'
So to my knowledge, she is the one really'
that is there doing all the work.'
But she doesn't appear in the credit."
Only on the last page of the catalog,'
there are a few lines crediting her'
with assistance in preparing the show and the book,'
but not really for the work itself.'
Even as late as 1973, the same year'
of the New York Times article Arthur Drexler's introduction"
to the exhibition on Charles Eams for the design collection'
did not properly credit Ray, which is only'
mentioned as an assistant.
If institutions have difficulties acknowledging'
the Eams partnerships, the Smithsons, on the other hand,'
could identify.
They were absolutely fascinated with the Eams.'
They followed them everywhere, and they'
keep writing to them these affectionate notes.'
At one level, their born with their elder couple'
was personable.
Their standard form of address in correspondence--'
this is is all from the archives-- is from RC to--'
to R and C from A and P, and they usually'
closed with effusive displays, like [inaudible]'
very affectionately, or we think of you often, and much love.'
Their writings are also full of expressions of admiration.'
One by one of all of the pieces of the Eams work'
are treated as precious icons, magical tokens,'
that are presented as pardigms for their own practice.'
Of the Eams chair, the Smithsons will write, for example,'
that the chair was like a message of hope'
from another planet, that it's the only chair that one could"
put in an interior today-- they say, the only one they will'
put in their own living room.
Eams chairs, they say, they belonged to the occupant,'
not-- well, this one, they belonged to the [inaudible]'
only.
But the Mies chairs belonged to the occupant,'
which I think is a very interesting observation.'
Mies chairs are especially of the building'
and not of the occupant.
I think everybody will agree with this.'
No, when you look at the Barcelona chair,'
you think, I mean, who is this chair made for.'
I was fascinated when the [inaudible]'
did that beautiful installation in the Barcelona Pavilion.'
And I saw them sitting in one of the stools assigned'
in the book, and they perfectly fit.'
I mean, whose bodies that will feel comfortable'
in these chairs of Mies?
In any case, of the Eams select and ranged technique,'
the award, the award of the Smithsons, the Smithsons says,'
as a design method it's closer to flower arrangement"
and to good taste in the function of rooms'
with collectors pieces.
And then they claim to have to used the method'
themself in designing and equipping our own houses.'
The Eams, they write, had made the respectable'
to like pretty things.
This seems extraordinary.
But in our world, pretty things are equated'
with social irresponsibility.
Now of the Eams unique photographic technique,'
the Smithsons write, we who ourselves'
are very attentive listeners and watchers of everything'
the Eams have made-- you see this complete obsession'
with everything, right?
We have taken their invention of the flat on color'
documentation of objects as part of the way we now also work.'
So you can see that, in every instance,'
we are presented with something with an acute, actually,'
observation of an aspect of the Eams work.'
And then at the same time with the way'
in which they, the Smithsons, appropriated it and made'
it theirs.
Take, for example, this smooth transition'
from using in the Eams chairs, as they say before,'
to designing their own furniture.'
And they write, with the first interiors years'
sketches of this project [inaudible],,'
we realized we had a problem.
What was to be put in our furniture?'
We needed objects that achieve a culture or feat.'
They could not be falling back on the Thonert'
chair sold in France and used by Le Corbusier.'
As a response to this realization'
came the [inaudible],, a chair which'
looked as if it might follow you, or follow its owner'
room to the room and on to the beach.'
So here is the chair that the Smithsons designed.'
And incredibly enough, was appropriated immediately'
by the Miralles.
Enric Miralles and Carme Pinos, they reproduced this house,'
and then they installed in their house.'
The Smithsons chairs take on precisely'
the same characteristics they ascribe to the Eams chairs.'
They occupy the space vacated by the Thonet.'
They are from the same period as the architecture,'
as for example in the Smithsons house'
of the future, where they are clearly inspired by the Eams.'
But at the same time, it's also different."
And very important, they belonged to the occupant'
and not to the building.
So the Smithsons put themselves in the place of the Eams,'
absorbing their mode of operation'
rather than the specific details of their form.'
But the key symptoms of identification'
between the Smithsons and the Eams'
are not just there the endless reference to particular aspects'
of the Eams.
They are also in the couple's techniques"
of presenting themselves and the kinds'
of obsessions they manifest.
And above all-- and perhaps this is not surprising when one'
couple bonds with another--
the symptoms are in the pervasive sense'
of domesticity, literal domesticity as when'
Peter Smithson reflects on the Eams breakfast table,'
and of course he saves that for the Eams, the table.'
The breakfast table is a form of architecture only then'
in the same movement to go back to Walter Gropius and Ise'
Gropius breakfast table in the home in Massachusetts'
near here.
And we end up with an imagine of Alison'
at breakfast on a snowy day in their country house in Funhill.'
So they trade this domesticity in all this.'
And actually conceptual domesticity'
as when, in the same article, Peter'
organizes the history of architecture'
from the Renaissance to the present as that of our family,'
as more a family of only six members.'
[inaudible] Alberti Francisco de Giorgo'
represented the generation of the Renaissance,'
and Mies, the Eams, and the Smithsons'
represented three generations of modern architecture.'
Do you see what is says there?
Piper Editorial.
This is a lecture here.
And the poster was done by a student from Harvard,'
apparently under instructions from Peter Smithson'
in a telephone call from London.
So there are three areas of the Renaissance'
and the three generations of the present.'
The Smithsons made many, many, many family trees.'
But what is incredible is the couple's insistence"
on the inclusion on themselves in these family trees.'
In the modern architectural genealogy within [inaudible]'
and which they were able to communicate'
in such brilliant ways in their writings,'
the Smithsons wanted to see themselves'
as following the tradition of Mies.'
Peter, for example, to write my own debt to Mies'
is so great that it's difficult for me"
to disentangle what I hold as my own thought.'
So often they have been the results'
of insights received from him.
So he cannot even know what he thought himself or what he got'
from Mies.
But if Mies was the architect of the heroic period'
that they most admired, the Eams were'
like their favorite cousins, the ideal for the second, less'
heroic generation, the generation straddling World War'
II.
And it was with them, in fact, that the Smithsons'
felt closer alliances.
They keep producing these geneologies.'
For example, on the occasion of our lecture of Alison Smithson,'
where she goes the see the Farnsworth House,'
she makes these genealogy, which goes from the Farnsworth'
House to the Eams house to their own pavilion in Fonthill.'
Or then Villa Savoye on another occassion is Villa Savoye.'
So the Eams are the thing that stayed, do you realize that?'
So the Eams is always in the middle'
or, in this particular case, that with Reedbull House,'
the Eams House, and again, their house in Fonthill.'
In a lecture by Peter in connection'
with the reconstruction of the 1956'
exhibition of the independent group,'
he links the party on pavilion with the Eams house'
points out that the Eams two had been familiar'
with the Mies sketch of the glass house of 1934,'
and again different projects produce different genealogies.'
And this is interesting-- again, to return to the question'
of women--
because Peter Smithson-- what a kind of [inaudible],,'
I because that could not be more separated from this idea.'
And he [inaudible].
Never mind.
Peter Smithson was significantly one of the first architects'
to point to the significance of women in modern architecture.'
He keep emphasizing women in what he calls the female line.'
And he writes, much of the inheritance'
reaches us through the female line.'
And he mentions [inaudible],, who collaborated of course'
with [inaudible] for the [inaudible] House.'
Lily Reich, Charlotte Perriand, Ray Eams--'
those are the four names he mentioned.'
And of course, the line continues all the way,'
in his view, to Alison Smithson, in what'
Peter calls a conscious homage to the founding mothers.'
Now we have talked a lot about the founding fathers.'
In architecture, it's always talking about the founding"
fathers.
But this is the first time that I have'
heard the founding mothers.
The Smithsons, who were very sensitive to women's presence"
in the history of architecture for our century'
more than any historian or critique of that period,'
but the women they identify are always'
symptomatically in couples.
And this may have been, for example,'
the symptomatic absence of significant figures like'
[? guile ?] Ingrid, not of interest to them because they'
cannot put her in a partnership.
So they refer to my Margaret McDonaold, and Mackintosh.'
Probably you have never hear about Margaret McDonaold.'
Have you ever heard about Margaret McDonaold?'
I mean, for Mackintosh, he spent his entire life'
saying that he was normal, that he was a genius.'
Nobody seemed to have believed retroactively.'
But the thing is that, in many ways,'
I think we are going backwards.
Because the other day, I was doing research'
on something else, and I came upon this'
a moment in the early 20th century when Margaret McDonaold'
goes with Mackintosh, and they put together'
an exhibition in Vienna.
And all the newspapers and all the magazines'
talk about Margaret McDonaold, and the red haired women,'
this is strong woman that has done this great project,'
and they practically don't mention him."
So what's wrong with us?
What's wrong that the journalist and the critics of the time"
have no problem recognizing her, and one hundred and-- and what'
is it--
18 years later, we are stuck with Macintosh.'
And we don't know that he spent his entire life"
saying that he was actually quite a regular guy,'
that she was actually unbelievable.'
Why will he say that?
Why will we say that?
It has to be something, right?
So what was I saying?
So he refers to Margaret McDonald and Rennie Mackintosh,'
Charlotte Perriand, and Le Corbusier, [inaudible]'
Lily Reich and Meis and so on.
So a couple in a way identifying themselves with other couples,'
perhaps identifying other couples,'
perhaps identifying themselves with other couples.'
As Alison put it, I can see the part played by Ray Eams in all'
that they do, the perseverance in finding what exactly'
is the one thing wanted, although the secret may not'
even know the exact object until finally it's seen."
Or when writing about Mies, Peter suddenly remarks,'
as if talking to himself, I want to know more about Lily Reich.'
And in a footnote to this--
because this a [inaudible] and he writes a footnote to this'
very blunt comment--
I want to know more about Lily Reich.'
You normally don't write that in a scholarly book, right?"
You won't write that.
I think it's kind of fresh.
I want to know more about Lily Reich.'
In a footnote, he points out to this picture of [? meet ?]'
and Lily Reich in 1933 published in this book of Ludwig Glasser,'
this silvery book on Mies furniture'
in the collection of the Museum of Modern Art.'
But he says nothing about it.
It's this picture of Mies and Reich"
on a boat where they each look in the other's direction,"
but their gaze symptomatically never cross.'
But it's also not just heterosexual"
couples that interest this [inaudible]..'
And this is fascinating to me.
When discussing Johanes Duiker in the heroic period'
of modern architect, Peter writes,'
it is not for me to deal with the relationship between Duiker'
and Bernard Bivjoet.
I speak of them as one eminence.
In fact, Duiker Bivjoet have collaborated'
in many projects including the famous Zonnestral'
Sanatorium in Hilversum, the open area'
schools in Amsterdam, etc.
Do we know these projects as a collaboration?'
No, we tend to think about as the projects of Duiker.'
Same thing happened when Bivjoet goes'
to parties and collaborates with [inaudible]'
in this beautiful [french] in Paris.'
Last year there was a beautiful exhibition'
in the US museum, extensive documentation,'
and great material.
And this poor Bivjoet that had collaborated on the project'
was not even in the record.
And you go like, how is it possible'
that they make such a big deal about how this was the best'
project of [inaudible] and how nothing else that he do'
was anywhere closer to this.
And could it be that Bijvoet had have something to do with it?'
Because it's the same guy that also did this,"
that collaborated this.
Duiker never did anything better than when he was with him.'
So actually something that Alison told me--'
actually, she was very upset when Enric Miralles'
split with Carme Pinos.
They were very upset.
It was like they were breaking themselves apart, too.'
And they happened to be in New York.'
I have invited them to give a lecture in Princeton'
this is 1992.
And he said, Beatrice, there is something in collaboration--'
what did he say?
Something the addition is higher than the sum of the parts.'
Something else happens, that [inaudible]'
would each of us contribute.
And he says, they would never do, neither of them'
will rise to the same level that they did together again.'
And that was actually a good prediction.'
Anyway, so Bijvoet-- yes, and speaking of soap operas,'
Bijvoet arrived in Paris with his wife and his child'
and was the wife of Dukier.
I mean like, what?
And they were all living together in the same flat'
and eventually Bijvoet divorced his wife'
and married the wife of Duiker, Erminne.'
So anyway, looking at the--
because it's also interesting that the whole history"
of modern architecture is full of soap'
operas that we don't talk about.
But it's also, we have to look into that."
That's super interesting.
Why would we not look into that?
That explains a lot about what happens.'
Anyway, going back to this cover of the heroic period,'
I think it's evident just by looking"
at the corner of this book on modern architecture--'
one of my favorite books on modern architecture--'
that it's evident already that the Smithsons are"
interested in collaborations.
For them, the history of architecture'
is the history of a conversation.'
You can see that it's not a heroic architect in the core,"
but Mies and Le Corbusier in the grounds of the Wiesenhof'
discussing this project here, Le Corbusier and Gropius'
in a cafe in Paris, again, arguing, talking.'
CIAMs and Team 10s were for them occasions'
for a wider conversation, if you want a family conversation.'
And think about the difference between these photographs'
of the CIAM people are all kind of like soldiers'
in the kind of new situation that the Team 10 is creating.'
So Alison also wrote Team 10 is a small family group.'
And this very much suggests these kind'
of pictures that you have of the Team 10s,'
very, very different of these ones.'
Alison wrote, Team 10 is a small family group'
who knows each other so well that'
can begun to work together with a better mind'
that each school achieve alone.
Again, the question of collaboration--'
that they could work together better than they could'
each of them work alone.
And on the occasion of Pierre Jeanneret's death,"
Alison broad a very moving report here,'
Alison and Peter, where they write,'
we have a various [inaudible] significant houses,'
and indeed, there is Farnsworth, a few early Rudolf'
houses and very little else.
The earliest document is from the architects journal June 27,'
1946.
It is these with the thought of on the death of Pierre'
Jeanneret.
The house on here embodies the sweetest collaboration with'
Jean Prouv , who really has been unfortunate in his'
architects' collaborators.
So look at what is happening.
The Smithsons are paying tribute to Pierre Jeanneret by showing'
his house with Prouv .
So they removed him from Le Corbusier's gigantic figure,"
but only to pair him again right away'
in the sweetest collaboration.
And in the process, they introduce the question'
of Prouv  and happy marriage, so to speak.'
For example, when they say the same.'
The suitor is going with Jean Prouv  who really has to be'
unfortunate in his architects collaborators.'
I mean, I think he's kind of opening a possibility of us"
to study here about what is going on with this'
collaboration because, of course,'
Prouv  had collaborated with a succession of architects'
including Tony Garnier, [inaudible] Le Corbusier,'
[inaudible] for the Freie University, etc.'
But since the [inaudible] remember'
that to Jeanneret bringing up the matter of partnerships'
raises questions about what is perhaps'
the most unexplored, the most unknown partnership'
of the century and asks the question'
of what generally may have contributed'
to the work of Le Corbusier.
Nobody knows this Paul Pierre Jeanneret'
I have worked a lot on Le Corbusier.'
My dissertation was on Le Corbusier.'
I spent years in the Fundacion Le Corbusier.'
I never knew that it was so short.'
It's not that Le Corbusier is a giant."
He's really little.
And I had to go with my students to--'
I taught a class on Chandigarh.
I took the students to Chandigarh in Chandigarh.'
On my god, in Changdigarh, they adored Jeanneret'
because he was there.
He was the one that built
Changdigarh.
He went there.
He had spent years there.
He wanted to be buried there.
He died there.
He loved India.
And then I started paying attention to Jeanneret'
and realized how little we know about this figure'
here on the beach--
I don't know-- boxing with Le Corbusier."
And then finally, there is the love affairs.'
Here is a Lotte Beese, that we mentioned before--'
first a student in the Bauhaus to be'
admitted in the architecture.
They were all put into the textile section.'
All the women, they were not allowed to be in the metal--'
I mean, it's a whole history.
So Lotte insisted on being in architecture'
and had actually an affair with Jonanes Meyer, who had finally'
agreed that she will enter into the School of Architecture,'
but also told her that, if he were to do that,'
she probably would have to associate herself'
professionally with a male architect'
because otherwise she will never be able to do anything'
in her life.
She did exactly that.
She associated herself with him, as he was married.'
And then he's made head of the Bauhaus."
And she was a student was asked to leave.'
Why?
Because it wouldn't look good that the director of the school"
was having a story with a student,'
one that's in [inaudible].
She have to leave.
But anyway, so here you have Lotte Beese,'
and I don't who is this guy, this creep in the background."
But that's that.
I don't know about--
I mean, I think Lotte Beese is super fascinating.'
As you know, then she married Mart Stam'
and became Lotte Beese Stam, and she'
the head of the reconstruction of the hall of Rotterdam.'
And she's an force.
She's an unbelievable in architecture."
And she really was interested in any of these guys.'
Anyway you think about it, all she's in this Bauhaus,"
she's always photographing this Lotte Beese and other women"
in the Bauhaus, amazing photographs.'
Annie and Joseph Ahlberg, but particularly I want to--'
from other love affairs but I want'
to particularly talk about the affair of Catherine Bauer'
with--
what's his name-- Lewis Mumford, which you see here."
Catherine Bauer was a social historian who married,'
by the way, William Worster, Lewis Mumford in 1940'
and in a way politicized him, infusing'
his domestic science with hard social and unpolitical ideas.'
But before that, he had also radically changed'
the work of Lewis Mumford by inspiring'
him to take on the grand themes of technology and community,'
which will become the basis of his best known books.'
And Mumford in turn encouraged Bauer'
to contemplate aspects of the sign that could not'
be quantified to broaden and humanized'
the definition of housing reform doing'
the several years of the rove affair'
while he was married to someone else.'
Mumford had met Bauer in 1929.
Listen to this because you have read a lot about Mumford'
but you haven't read these I'm sure."
We were drawn together by our common interesting'
in modern architecture.
From the beginning, we were excited by each other's minds"
and plunged and leaped in a sea of ideas like two dolphins,'
even before our bodies had time for one another.'
Wow.
Catherine's challenging in mind, particularly"
during the first two years of our intimacy,'
had a stimulating and liberating effect'
upon my whole development.
In effect, she played the part of of Hilda Wangel'
in Ibsens play, the voice of younger generation,'
bidding the Master Builder to quit'
building modest, commonplace houses'
and to erect, instead, an audacious tower, even'
if, when he has reached the top, he might fall to his death.'
OK, wow.
So There: you have another Mumford from the one'
that you normally talk.
Anne Tying one of the first women architects'
to graduate from Harvard University, from this place,'
became Louis Kahn, a lover, as you know,'
were working in his office and collaborating closely'
in the designs.
In a letter to Tyng where she was in Rome in 1954--'
you want to know why he was in Rome?'
Because she got pregnant and then, of course, because she'
was married to someone else.
She was told to go to Rome.
It was better because otherwise it was kind of embarrassing.'
And she says in a letter, I'm waiting anxiously"
for us to be together again in our wonderful ways of love'
and work, which again is nothing really'
but another form of love.
Louis Kahn.
And Anne Tying writes, we were both workaholics.'
In fact, work had become a kind of passionate play.'
We were able to bring out each other's creativity,"
building on each other's ideas.
The full of tragedy of the relationship'
that you probably know well even if you have seen--'
I don't know whether you have seen the film."
Anne Kahn's ultimate selfishness unfolds."
The letters between them, which are all published in a book'
that was done by [inaudible] a few years ago,'
remain filled with the details of design--'
so published designs and private soap operas'
are here inseparable.
As the institutions of records for the field,'
the Museum of Modern Art found itself'
in the middle of many questions on disputes of attribution.'
Tyng, for example, who had ended her relationship with Kahn'
in 1960, shortly before the museum's visionary architecture"
exhibition was surprised not to be credited'
for her work in the exhibition and particularly'
for the city tower in Philadelphia, which'
is a really hard project.
She says, I did not get an invitation to the opening.'
When I ask our secretary about it,'
he say my name might not even be on the credit label.'
I merely asked Lou if my name was credited.'
He answered no.
So I suggested yesterday it may be better if he called museum'
than if I called.
There was no Strurm and Drang.
He simply called and my name was added.'
I was profoundly shocked that Lou would do such a thing,'
especially since [inaudible] progressive architecture,'
the Atlas, and a number of other publications'
already have given credit to both of us.'
I could not believe that his desire for a recognition'
will erode his integrity since sharing credit'
with me will not necessarily diminish his fame.'
In the end, the city tower appear'
as Lou Kahn and Anne Tyng architects associated'
in the exhibition at MoMA.
Kahn publicly, if inadequately, as you will,'
acknowledged Anne Tyng when in 1973, a year before his death,'
he gave the National Academy of Design a self-portrait'
of himself along with a portrait he had made of Anne Tying'
in 1946 inscribed with the following sentence--'
this is a portait of Anne Tying architect,'
who was the geometry conceiver of the Philadelphia Tower.'
Well, that's not exactly so because I"
thought of the essence, but she knew its geometry.'
To this day, she pursues the essence'
of constructive geometry and now at the university of Penn'
and other places like Harvard.
We worked together on my projects'
from a purely conception base, December 27, 1972.'
So even in the moment of acknowledging her contribution'
to this project, he draws the line between the essence'
that apparently he thought about and the geometry'
that she figured out.
And this makes no sense in [inaudible]'
that obviously, as anybody can see, is all geometry.'
So what is the essence exactly here?'
Well, anyway, to conclude perhaps the new fascination'
with collaboration is actually part of a new voyeurism.'
Television, the internet, and social media'
have brought a new sense of limits.'
Talks shows, blogs, social networking sites, etc.,'
are changing the standards for what we consider private.'
Can we expect architecture to remain immune.'
We don't care anymore so much about the heroic figure"
of the modern architecture, of an architecture,'
about the facade, but about their internal weaknesses.'
Architectures themselves having started,'
or have been doing it for a while'
actually, to tell us private stories'
about their desperate attempts to get jobs,'
about their pathological experiences'
with clients, about falling in the street, and even'
about the [inaudible].
And we pay more attention than they'
were trying to dictate to us what their work meant.'
On the one hand, there is a concerted effort'
to demystify architectural practice and debunk heroes.'
On the other hand, all the details of private life'
are being incorporated into a kind of heroic image'
as in a kind of therapy.
And finally, who has been keeping all these secrets'
for so long?
Historians and critics have felt more confident, I think,'
even re-assured responding to the idea of an individual'
author and the former qualities of the building as an art'
object than to the messiness-- because it's very messy--"
of architectural practice.
Paradoxically, as we have seen, practicing architects'
have tended to be more sensitive to the subject'
perhaps because they know from their own experience what'
goes on really in an office and are endlessly'
curious about what's happening in other people's practices."
Architects in partnerships from Denise Scott Brown to Rem'
Koolhaas have publicly complained about the opposition'
of critics and the media with the single figure,'
despite their offices at efforts to provide precise credit.'
Since Denise Scott Brown talked to the Alliance of Women'
in Architecture in New York in 1973--'
1973 seems to be a date that we keep coming back to.'
On sexismo and the star system in architecture'
that became the subsequent article room at the top.'
Sexismo on the star system in architecture,'
but that circulated privately for many years'
before it was finally published in that book,'
Architecture, a Place for Women in 1989.'
A number of women architects had been'
raising issues of their own.
It's not by chance that women and gay scholars"
have been leading the way.
The ease of collaboration is of course'
indebted to feminist criticism with its focus'
on the veiling of contributions and the domesticity of power.'
More recent scholarship on areas of race,'
sexuality, cultural studies, post-colonial studies, etc.,'
has also a crucial resource.
Architecture history is starting to absorb many of its lessons'
and opening research to new questions.'
And my prediction is many more secrets are bound to come out.'
Thank you very much.
[side conversation]
Hi, does anybody have a question?'
I actually have a question if anybody would'
you like to keep thinking.
And I don't intend it to sound cheeky at all,"
but this is an incredible amount of archival research.'
And I'm wondering almost what duration"
and how many collaborators it requires to pull together'
this much information?
This much information?
You mean my own research?
Actually, in this particular case, as I say,'
I was fascinated with this question for a while,'
and there were a number of occasions in which this was'
put together over the years.
So it looks like a lot, but in fact Alison Smithson'
died in 1992 or something.
And there was an event at [inaudible],,'
and this is the first time that I thought about the Smithsons'
obessions with the Eams.
And so, because I have been doing all that work'
for domesticity at war, I had a lot of archival material'
from the Library of Congress, which'
included personal letters between the Smithsons'
and the Eams.
And I knew about their relationship.'
And then I interviewed Peter extensively'
for an issue of October magazine,'
and the issue of the Eams and their travels'
to California and their obsession with the Eams.'
So I kept make making notes, where'
I was doing something else, which of course'
they end up in a group interview for October.'
So it's a project that it's been with me for a long time,"
and I have been adding things.
Then what happened?
Most recently at the Museum of Modern Art, first they'
had a conference that about MoMA women,'
all the women that are in the Museum of Modern Art.'
They budget only one person in architecture.'
It was a two day conference, right?'
So then they were doing the book.'
And I said to them, if you're going"
to be inviting me like a token architect,'
maybe I'm not going to do it.
And so, they invited a few other people.'
But I ended up looking into the archives.'
And a lot of what I found is not here.'
But now I'm thinking about putting it together"
in a book about the these stories.'
There's a lot in the Museum of Modern Art archives,"
about questions of attribution.
It's not only Tying.
And it's not only this a lot of prom."
So as the institution of record, they'
have been deliberately keeping women'
out in such a way that I think they were themselves scared'
if I were to put all these details into their MoMA women--'
I don't know whether you have ever"
seen this big, fat book of MoMA women, most art world.'
And because it was MoMA, I thought'
that I should just deal with what is in the archives.'
And so, they didn't want that I wasn't going so--"
they wanted a little bit more diffuse.'
So it ended up being a combination of some'
of those things of the Smithsons and a little bit about MoMA,'
but not really totally everything'
that I have I found in the archives.'
That's an interesting development."
I'd love to see the book.
We'll start down here.
Beatrice, thank you so much.
This is like the highlight of my year that you're here."
It's super exciting.
We have a new dean--
chair, sorry.
New chair, Mark.
Sorry, my bad.
I'm still new.
We have a new chair, Mark Lee, and I just was wondering'
if the fact that we have Mark Lee instead of the Johnston'
of Johnson Mark Lee as our dean--'
the GSC's never had a female dean--"
if there's maybe an echo of the ventur--"
chair, did I do it again?
Sorry.
Have we had a-- oh, Toshiko Mori.'
But we've never had a female dean."
You've never had a dean, but you did have a chair."
Toshiko Mori, actually, Toshiko Mori was in way, I will say,'
don't take that bad.
But I will say you are now behind because a [? whole ?]'
course is like Columbia University,'
is run by is a dean, at Yale University [inaudible]..'
Princeton, the dean is a woman, Penn.'
And instead, you were ahead when Toshiko Mori was chair.'
That was the first time that a woman'
in such an important position, wasn't it?"
I think historically.
So the question of how woman have'
entered into a leadership position in academia'
is very interesting.
But I don't know whether you were going there"
or with the collaboration.
I mean, I was just thinking about Veturi Scott'
Brown and the Pritzker Prize, and then just thinking'
about Johnston Mark Lee and a new chair, sorry.'
And I don't know.
It just feels relevant, and I wanted to just throw it to you.'
Right, no, that's super interesting."
It's another collaboration.
And I hope she will also be around.'
I suppose-- if they are going to have the firm here'
and in Los Angeles, but I don't know how it's going to work."
But this is an interesting question that you are bringing.'
It could also deanships be thought in a different way,'
in a more collaborative way.
Or do we still have to have the hero architect?'
I mean, we come from--
the generation is the generation that Mies was running this'
and Gropius was the ta da da.
And now we're in a different moment."
We don't need another hero maybe."
We need something else, right?
So yes, even in education, the question of collaboration'
is of course super important.
Hi, Beatrice, I'm really interested in your talk"
and your research.
But I'm wondering if you have ever"
come across criticism of intellectual life'
versus private life that we're more"
interested in the real, actual life of this person'
this figure than the private life, and the private life'
becomes--
it's serious, it's not scholarly enough."
And I mean, you compared movies with architecture.'
But the movies, the real credit is the director.'
The editor, the cinematographer sometimes'
doesn't get mentioned.
The make up person, nobody ever knows what that name is.'
It's a name.
It doesn't get attention.
So there is a difference between a credit line'
and the public's attention, who's getting the attention."
So I wonder what your thoughts are on that.'
Yeah, but at least they are credited.'
At least they are acknowledged.
At least there are Oscars for all kinds of different things.'
Are there prizes in architecture for all kinds'
of-- not so much, right?
How about the intellectual and the private?'
I suppose what I'm trying to say is that you cannot make that"
separation.
I think that's a polemic, but that's what I'm saying."
And you know with Jacqueline [inaudible] I mean, come on,'
you do did your thesis your thesis at Princeton'
on the question of Jacqueline [inaudible],,'
and her intimate relationship with Gideon.'
I mean, how can we think--
since I've read your dissertation,"
I cannot think of Giedion the same way.'
I just cannot.
And of course, again, Giedion is a super significant hero.'
How many people here know how incredible was Carola Gideon?'
Impossible to understand Sigried Giedion'
without understanding Carola Giedion,'
who put him into a lot of differences.'
But then also the personal affairs are also important.'
The affair with Jacqueline brought him'
into different areas as well.
And it's very, very significant, the relationship and the impact"
that it had on the world.
Those things cannot be separated.'
This project that we just saw of Kahn'
is inseparable from their personal relationship.'
Thank you for the talk.
It seems the history ended it at OMA, if I'm correct."
And I'm curious, taking these themes"
of private and public, dirty secrets,'
and even where I guess partnerships become'
seen as domestic issues, I'm curious if you could maybe"
make some comments on how these historic lines bring us'
to today, where these themes have a lot'
to do with the MeToo movement, with the shitty men'
of architecture list.
Is there a line to be drawn, I mean, to connect these?'
Yeah, probably, I'm not so sure that the history"
finishes with OMA.
Ray was important to me in as much'
as he at least was able, when looking back historically'
and paying attention to the question of the partners that'
had emerged in the 50s, even if it was in person that he made'
this reference to the perversion by proxy, even if it was kind'
of--
I thought it was super interesting that somebody'
was paying attention that, yeah, who is taking advantage,'
I ask people.
And the fact that he got-- but I didn't"
go into their relationship.
I didn't go into the relationship."
But of course I'm fully aware of how Rem, also went many times"
to see Bob Venturi in the beginning of his career,'
went to visit Bob Venturi and Denise Scott Brown repeatedly'
and was fascinated by them.
And it's inevitable that, when you"
are in that kind of personal relationship,'
you also look at all the--
so whole thing about role models,'
I think the couples also see other role models'
in other couples.
I think it is very significant that it's always other couples"
looking at other couples.
And that's what I'm trying to say."
But I don't know whether I finish"
in Enric Miralles [inaudible] Carmen Pinos'
is much younger than Rem.
So I guess that's the last people I mention."
It's very hard to talk about the present."
I'm a historian myself.
So in this particular case, I would'
say the work is totally influenced'
by what is happening now.
And it has been, as I said before,'
in gestion for a long time.
So I was already sensitive to a lot of things'
because now all of this is coming to the surface.'
But it's not that we haven't been thinking about it"
for all these years.
Marissa mentioned sexuality and space.'
I can tell you a million stories from myself from others.'
I was in this very room when there'
was a conference in which Denise Scott Brown was speaking.'
And there were all the big boys of architecture--'
Peter Eisenman and Michael Graves and so and so on.'
And then Peter Eisenman got up and complained'
that Robert Venturi had not come and that he always'
says the surrogate.
The surrogate was Denise.
So until very recently, these kinds of things'
were being said in public, and everybody laughed,'
like how funny is that, the he sends the surrogate.'
The surrogate was Denise.
So of course, many other stories--'
and to his credit, Moneo, who was chair--'
told Peter that that was not was not right.'
But most of the time, people just laughed--'
They didn't laugh actually.
People booed him resoundingly.
This room, I was here, the whole audience--'
Yeah, all the women were in the back like screaming.'
So no one laughed.
I mean, they was shouting.
Moneo stopped him, right?
So it was boo.
It was boo.
Wasn't really laughed about.
I don't know.
I don't know.
Some people were close to me, other boys.'
Anyway, yeah, we were super mad.
That's true.
But these things still happen.
And it's not that long ago.
It was 1990 whatever, 91, 90 whatever.'
It's just-- the surrogate, I mean."
So how do we go into-- it's very touchy business, right?"
It's a different-- as a scholar, I"
find it more difficult to go into the details of previous'
of practices.
But it doesn't have to be--
I suppose it changes as we go on into the present.'
And I suppose, if I were to take this and turn it into a book,'
then I will start thinking about how we are collaborating today'
differently, not just in architecture,'
but in other aspects of our life and how'
in this culture of sharing, the idea of this single'
is completely bankrupt and perhaps also thinking'
about more positive models of things'
that we see around ourselves, of ways in which'
people are collaborating today.
It would be more interesting.
Because this is more of historical, or more'
looking back at all these collaborations that have taken'
place in the 20th century and the way'
in which we have systematically ignored for whatever reason.'
And I suppose the question of the private, yeah.'
I don't know.
I have to think about it, too.
Yes.
Hi, thank you.
So to jump on the question about private life'
and why is it being overshadowed by the intellectual.'
And this might be a little raw and hard to talk about'
at the present.
But what about personal character of architects'
and how that influences?
I'm thinking about Richard Meyer and some people,"
including Paul Goldberger, debating'
whether the moral compus that overshadows his work.'
So I was wondering what you think, and this is all'
coming to the surface.
And it seems that there's a lot of accomplices also over time"
in letting this persist.
Right.
Again, once again, we can separate'
what is happening in architecture'
with what is happening in the rest of the world.'
When the Harvey Weinstein story happened,'
I turned around to a friend and I said to him actually,'
I wonder how long it will be before things emerge'
in architecture because we have known these stories'
for our very, very, very long--
not with a level of detail.
I was shocked myself with some of the things'
and also kind of the crudity of all of them.'
And what is the bathrobe?
I mean, what is wrong with these guy, right?'
The bathrobe, I mean, what is wrong--'
But I have heard my share of stories at Columbia University'
when I was teaching there and at Princeton.'
And of course, those were things that we-- again,'
like the secret of the family that I was talking about that'
we all knew about it, that we knew who was more that--'
why you shouldn't get into an elevator"
alone with certain characters or why you should'
be careful with certain people.
But we didn't bring ourselves to--"
among ourselves, I suppose among women we will say,'
that guy is bad news.
But I mean, until recently this was happening to all of us,'
right?
I think there's time for one more."
If anybody would like to ask?
Hi, in terms of other fields--
I'm thinking of literature or science--"
is there a league of Colomina's and Colomino's that"
are doing you what you do in other areas'
and that you're in contact with--"
to know more of these stories that we don't know"
about other heroes of the past?
It's so interesting that you say that because of course there"
must be.
Of course, literature is a much more lonely field.'
I mean, you can be a really great writer'
and you are not collaborating with many people.'
I mean, that's possible.
But science, science has always been entirely open'
about the idea that they are collaborating.'
Of course, there's a lot of shitty stories"
about appropriating credit when a lot of people are involved.'
But in the field of science-- and that it comes always'
to the surface in tenure cases, in the humanities'
versus the sciences in places like, I suppose,'
Harvard or Princeton because in the humanities,'
if you are, of course, writing a paper with someone or a book,'
you have written a book with someone else--'
that doesn't count.
That's how amazing it is.
Even if you apply to the Guggenheim for a fellowship'
and you have written a book with someone, don't send that book."
They say that especifically because they couldn't"
tell what it is that you did and what it'
is that the other person did.
You're like, what?
In the science, on the other hand'
it's perfectly acceptable for tenure cases,"
for all kinds of promotions for even [inaudible]'
the collective authorship.
We have not achieved this in architecture.'
But I suppose what you're saying is also, have there been"
in studies on this question.
I should look into that.
I should look into that as I work'
more into the question of collaboration in architecture'
and how the issue is changing.
And the feminine-- like for example, with Kafka,'
and worked hand by hand with his secretary, that was'
the one who typed the thing.
And most of us, we don't know that."
And I'm sure there are thousands and thousands of stories"
in all the fields that--
I don't know--
I wish there was like a league of people like you'
that just bring--
No, I don't.
But I will look into it.
That is a good point.
It still is different.
But, yeah, it's like the client in architecture"
is super significant and we owe it to Alison Freidman'
to have brought that story.
But there are so many actors in architecture.'
That is very important to pay attention to,'
all the different contributions that make such a complex thing'
as architecture.
If anybody would like to join the league of Colomina's, we"
can have a sign up sheet.
Thank you so much for your lecture.'
Thanks, too, everybody.
[applause]
