Good evening, and thank you all for being here.'
It's really great pleasure to be able to welcome Professor Erik"
Swyngedouw.
I think a lot of people in the school'
are very familiar with Professor Swyngedouw's writings."
In the context of a design school,'
we're always seeking people who are"
writing about questions of urbanization,'
issues of globalization.
And their writings can be, really,'
both important in terms of understanding'
of those situations, but also inspiring to us'
in terms of values, the kind of things that matter.'
And I think it's really hard to think of too many people who"
are really covering the types of issues'
that Erik has been dealing with over the last 20 years or so'
in his writing that really touches on questions'
of the environment, dealing with aspects of ecology, water,'
many of the things that cross from architecture to landscape'
to urbanization.
And it's really great that we're finally"
able to have him here and lecture to us.'
It's also-- it takes a certain European perspective,"
I suppose, of context of being raised in Belgium,'
and spending time in Holland and France and the UK,'
to go through a sort of education that starts with, I'
suppose, partly agricultural engineering from the beginning,'
then going to urban planning, and then really'
going to geography, and the political issues.'
And I think the combination of those'
produces a very interesting set of conditions, where'
I think, I'm just assuming, that having"
had the interest in agricultural engineering,'
there's something very specific linked to the land,"
and to the way things are made, and so on and so forth.'
And then finally ending up doing a PhD'
with David Harvey at Johns Hopkins on probably'
a much more theoretical, but nevertheless the value system,'
I think, are still deeply rooted to the kind'
of local situations, and understanding of those themes.'
And of course, Erik has gone on to,'
both by himself but also a lot of times in collaboration'
with others, produce an amazing array of articles,'
over hundreds of them and of course many books.'
I also feel, just to do a little bit of a plug for us,'
I feel very lucky that Erik was able to contribute'
to this book, Ethics of the Urban,'
the City and the Spaces of the Political,'
that's just coming out now, where"
he wrote a wonderful essay.
So, we're really happy that you are here."
Please join me in welcoming Professor Erik Swyngedouw.'
[APPLAUSE]
Thank you very much for this wonderful introduction.'
It's a pleasure to be here, not only because it"
is, of course, a privilege to be standing here'
and to address an audience like this,'
but also because I like talking to designers, architects,'
and planners.
I am not.
I was trained as a planner a long time ago,'
but I'm now institutionalized as a geographer, which"
is this is kind of worldly thing that no one really knows what'
precisely it is, but which offers me the kind of space'
to intellectually do whatever I really want to do.'
And that's exactly why I like talking"
to designers and architects, because in contrast to me--'
I can just think.
My thoughts can just wildly go wherever my thoughts want'
to take me, but you, guys and girls,'
you have to do something.
You ultimately have to turn thought'
into concrete and steel.
And I don't know exactly, myself,"
how I would do that if I were in your sort of place,'
but I think that what you're doing is extremely important."
So, the articulation between thought and practice, I think,'
is what spaces like this ought to be all about.'
What I want to talk to you about today is the City of Gods.'
But a city as a political space, the city as polis,'
not the city as just an agglomeration of bodies'
and stuff together, but the city [? called polis, ?] the city'
as the space, the place, the environment,'
where [? the ?] [? democratic ?] is always contested,'
fought over, struggled over, and occasionally,'
not that fairly often, put into some sort of practice.'
And I think that is a challenge for us today,'
and is this challenge that I really'
want to talk about, because I think'
we live in very strange times.
And what I want to concentrate on for the next 50 minutes'
or so is a strange paradox, and the paradox'
sounds more as follows.
He said, on the one hand, a number of interlocutors,'
intellectuals, academics, journalists, and others,'
have been arguing for more than 20 years'
now, that we are living in depoliticizing times,'
that there is a general aversion, oft disdain,'
for the political, that things have'
been reduced to the techno-managerial management'
of the situation.
There is no real alternative possible than living'
in the globalized neoliberal city that we live in.'
The only thing we can do is manage it'
to the best of our techno-managerial abilities.'
But the real political choice is suspended.'
That's one side of the argument.
And I would argue, for example, that to complete this'
that Trump in the US, or Le Pen in France, are, in many ways,'
a symptom of displays of depoliticization.'
On the other hand--
and particularly since what I and others have called'
"the magical year 2011," and why it\'s'
magical I'll explain in a moment--"
since the magical year 2011, a growing number'
of people worldwide, in cities in many parts of the world,'
have begun to say, "No.
This has to stop.
We are indeed living in post-democratic times,'
but we want to re-conquer the democratic."'
And also, the emanation of these desires'
for the conquest of the democratic unfolded and then'
the [? urban. ?]
So, that's a strange paradox.
On the one hand, we've already seen so many people"
fighting for something else, for democratization.'
And on the other hand, those argue'
there is no real choice possible.'
It's that paradox that I want to explore."
And I think I can't be in any better company than Michel"
Foucault, who, in one of his last seminars before he died,'
was, of course, addressing the question of the political a bit'
more widely than his earlier work that all of us know,'
and cite profusely, where he talks about a couple'
of constructions and [? solutions ?]'
of everyday power, to in his later work,'
considered the biggest sort of questions'
of geopolitical power.
And in one of those seminars, he said,'
quite controversially, and very rarely'
picked up by scholars of his work, is, "The people--"'
and he means, of course, the people as a political category,'
not the population as a sociological category--'
"The people is those who, refusing'
to be the population that is the objects'
of biopolitical governance, disrupt the system."'
I think that sets the tone well for what I want to say.'
So, the title of my talk is, Insurgent Architects'
and the Spectral Return of the Political'
in the Post-Democratic City.
For people who want to know more about it,'
this one I'll talk about is part of some"
of what is being discussed at length in these two books.'
I have a few chapters in the light hand one,'
Can Architecture Be an Emancipatory Project?'
Interesting question, isn't it?
As is often the case, it is not academics'
who offer us the most incisive insight'
in the situation of our times.
As we all know, it's often novelists, poets, movie makers,"
who in many, many ways tell us exactly,'
do with surgical precision the analysis'
of the condition that we live in.'
We academics are usually hopelessly'
late in diagnosing that.
So, that's why often referred to novelists."
This is a quote from the great, late José Saramago,'
a great artist of the city.
I'm sure most of you know his wonderful trilogy"
of the urban condition that we're in,"
starting with The City of the Blind,'
and finishing, just a few years before he died,'
with a book that was translated to English as, Seeing,'
but which, in Portuguese, translates better'
as Essay on Lucidity.
And this is a comment that he made in this book,'
that democracy today has become this sacrosanct principle that'
we treat as a piece of a museum display,'
but it cannot be questioned, nor be interrogated.'
Let me just tell you the story of the novel, Seeing.'
It's the story of a city.
It's actually the same city where,"
just a few years earlier, most all of the citizens'
went blind, except for this one woman, which'
was, of course, a parable of the situation that we are in.'
In this third installment of his urban trilogy,'
in the same city where sight had been restored,'
that city was making itself up for the great festival'
of democracy.
The subsequent next Sunday, the citizens of the city'
would vote for the governors of the city.'
And as usual, the pundits and the journalists'
all arguing and debating whether the party of the left'
will gain or lose 1% or 2%, or whether it'
was the party of the right who will gain 1% or 2%,'
or whether it was the party of the center'
that will hold onto power.
Everyone was excited, and then the thunder'
came, really bad thunder.
It was raining, bad weather.
And in the morning, when those who put themselves up'
as candidates to be the governors of the urban fate'
of the citizens who were anxiously'
awaiting the verdict of the democratic process,'
got a bit anxious because no one showed up'
to the polling stations.
But in the afternoon, people started coming in,'
and everyone sighed of relief.
And that evening, when the votes were counted,'
and those who put themselves up would'
know the verdict of the people, it'
turned out that 50% of the population'
had spoiled the ballot.
Panic.
"How can we govern the city democratically'
if we do not have the full democratic support'
of the population?
Something must have gone wrong."
And of course, as we now know in Europe,'
we do this systematically, if the people vote wrong,'
we hold a new election.
The European Union is very good at that.'
It had to do it several times in Denmark'
and in France in the 1990s.
So, the governors decided to run the election again,'
three weeks later.
And three weeks later it was a beautiful day, a spring day,'
and people went to the polling stations in big droves.'
And at night, when the votes were counted,'
it turned out that 80% had spoiled the ballot.'
This time, the governor thought it was something going on.'
"Surely, there must be a conspiracy'
against the sacrosanct principles of a democracy.'
There must be some hidden terrorist cell'
who is masterminding this perversion'
of the democratic process."
And, of course, they went searching for the culprits.'
But the usual tactics of intimidation, police action,'
incarceration, torture, to find out'
those who were trying to undermine civilization'
as we know it.
Couldn't find anyone.
So after three months of ruthless repression,'
the governors decided that it was'
time to teach the citizens of the city as lesson.'
They said, "We, the governors of the city,'
are going to leave the people alone.'
We are going to abandon the city," expecting, of course,'
that in a minimum of time, without proper governing'
of the city, that the city would descend into anarchy,'
and that the citizens of the city'
would beg the governors to come back'
to restore peace and order in the disintegrating polis.'
So, the governors left.
And what happened in the city?
Nothing.
The teachers kept on teaching.
The professors kept on professing.'
The butchers kept on butchering.
The garbage men and women kept on cleaning the streets.'
End of story.
So, I thought this story actually captures well what'
I want to say.
And I'm in good company.
Here is Giorgio Agamben, Italian philosopher,'
who, in 2006, observed that, "There'
is a shift from the model of the polis founded on a center, that'
is, a public center or ogera, to a new metropolitan's"
spatialization that is certainly invested'
in a process of depoliticization
Now, this process of depoliticization I, and others,'
define and describe-- we'll say a bit more about that"
in a moment--
as a process of post politicization.'
So I would argue that we're living in post-political times,"
in post political cities, increasingly constructed'
over the past 20 years or so, in the global north, primarily,'
but with examples to be found elsewhere, too.'
For me, post-politicization is the gradual imposition'
and generalization of the discourse and practice'
of consensual techno-managerial governance'
in post-democratic forms of governance.'
That's a whole mouthful.
We'll explain in a moment more in detail"
what I mean by the reduction of the political'
to questions of techno-managerial governing.'
But then, 2011 came, and 2011 was a magical year,'
because it was the year marked by the beginning'
of proliferating sequence of what I, and many others,'
have called urban insurgencies.
Here is my notes on the insurgent architect.'
It began in one of the usual sort of spaces,'
the [INAUDIBLE], which was, of course quickly dismissed'
and understood as the kind of stuff that happens'
in these post-colonial spaces.
In a few weeks time, this practice of urban insurgency'
spread like wildfire.
In Spain, hundreds, thousands of people'
occupied for weeks, Puerta del Sol in Madrid.'
Puerta de la Cataluña, in Barcelona,'
the most well-known but was happening elsewhere.'
Syntagma Square in Athens was occupied for months'
by the outraged, as they called them.'
In the US, it became known, experimented with,'
worked with, under Occupy.
And of course it continued.
It was a strange sort of outburst of radical discontent'
that expressed, however inchoate and incoherent it'
was, a deep discontent with the state of the situation,'
and called in its performative staging for something else.'
But that something else would operate'
under the banner of this empty signifier of democracy'
and equality.
Not all of those outbursts were, nonetheless,'
remotely democratizing in the sense'
that you and I would like to think of it.'
This is my own city.
This is my street.
That's where I live.
In the summer of 2011, just like it happened in Paris earlier,'
we had these violent anarchic outbursts of violence.'
and it went on for three days.
Cameron, at the time, he called those protesters'
outcasts that should be swept from the city.'
Those who are not entitled to be part of the city.'
It's what in ancient Athens they would call the [INAUDIBLE],"
the rabble, those who are not entitled'
to be citizens of the city.
But then many, like in Spain here,'
there were these practices of what'
I call insurgent democracy.
And this is in Spain, in Barcelona,'
demanding "Democracia Real Ya!"
Real democracy now.
That's a bit of a scandalous statement in Spain."
Spain, that had gone through a torturous history'
in the 20th century, the longest fascist dictatorship'
in continental Europe, went through a fairly smooth'
democratic transition in the 1980s.'
No one would dare to call Spain undemocratic.'
And there, there were these assorted insurgent architects'
asking for real democracy now.
What's going on what is the articulation,"
or the difference, between these ones with insurgent democracy'
on the one hand, and instituted forms of existing politics?'
And that kept on happening.
This was two years ago for the opening'
of the ECB, the European Central Bank headquarters in Frankfurt,'
where they organized a blockupy.
Let me point you to the image on the right bottom,'
and it says, "Let\'s choose communism."'
Now, in the US, that's a bit of a banned term."
This is Frankfurt.
20 odd years or so after we killed that monster,'
and there are those asking today,'
"Let\'s choose communism."
That's quite an outrageous statement."
What is going on?
And this is Paris this year, [INAUDIBLE],'
also demanding real democracy now.'
Now, many of those uprisings have died out.'
Many were just Bakhtinian, carnivalesque outbursts'
that staged the urban as a spectacle.'
But in many ways, it definitely itched the powers that be.'
As you know, the elites of the world'
meet every year in this little Swiss town'
called Davos, where they discuss, plan,'
organize the geography of the world'
according to their dreams and desire.'
It may not always work like that,'
but there we have the master architects'
of how their dreams can become geographical in the world.'
And of course they're acutely aware of the barriers,"
the obstacles that resist the making'
geographical of their desires.
So, they publish every year the World Risk Report.'
It's a wonderful read actually, big tome, 600 pages,"
usually, where they document the obstacles'
to what they want to do.
In 2012 the title of the Risk Report'
was called Seeds of Dystopia.
And I thought, what the hell are they talking about?'
So, I had to read, download I think 600 pages,'
and they referred precisely to the proliferation'
of these outbursts of urban discontent.'
I, in my naivety, thought of them'
as sort of seeds of potential rebirth of utopia,'
of a different kind than the ones of the past.'
But they called it Seeds of Dystopia,'
just to indicate that it did itch the powers that be.'
So, this sets the scene, I think,'
for exploring the paradox with which I introduced my talk.'
So, the four things I want to quickly go through'
is to, first of all, do the diagnosis of the times'
within, and explore them in somewhat greater detail'
what I mean by the post-political evacuation'
of the political, something that is very noticeable,'
and that in other work I've explored in empirical detail,"
very noticeable in the way in which'
our cities are being governed.
To then say something about the political.'
You may have noticed that I've used, almost exclusively,"
the word "the political" so far, and not "politics."'
The kind of things that we used to talk'
about, urban politics, or national politics,'
and choreographies of power, representation, et cetera,'
the kind of things I hear all the time and I put on CNN,'
they talk about politics.
I'm not particularly interest in politics these days,"
it's utterly irrelevant and uninteresting."
I'm much more interested in the political."
So I want to say something theoretically'
about that political diffidence, as Paul Ricoeur called it,'
between politics and the political.'
Because I think that might help us'
to make sense of this paradoxical situation'
that we find in so many other cities.'
I think it will help us to make sense'
of the insurgent democracy steadily manifested'
in these spaces of urban rebellion.'
To conclude, to ask the question,'
great question again to ask whether we'
can think, at the beginning of the 21st century,'
whether we can think of The Re-Awakening of History,'
as Alain Badiou calls it.
That is the question of whether it is possible to think,'
because we in places like this, we just think.'
We don't do that much.
Well, I certainly don't.
I read, I write, and I talk.
So, the question is, can we think today'
the possibility of a new urbanity where'
the practices of emancipations of freedom, equality,'
and solidarity can be practiced.
Or should we give up on that thought?'
Is the only thing we can do in the 21st century is'
to mobilize the best of our techno-managerial abilities,'
and they are considerable, to massage'
the situation that we're in?
That's the challenge.
But my point will be, if we believe that there's"
no other city possible, we should'
stop talking about freedom, equality, solidarity,'
and become good managers, and leave it at that.'
So that's the intellectual challenge,"
I think, I would like to leave you with at the end of my talk.'
So, let me say something first, about the process'
of post-politicization.
I know it's a bit of an unfortunate turn because"
of this funny prefix post, which of course suggests'
a sort of temporal transformation'
that, once upon a time we were political,'
and now are not any longer, just like post-modernity, sort of.'
It's not like that.
That's not the meaning of the term."
Maybe I should have used another one,'
but other people have been using this term now,'
and I did not want to confuse matters even further.'
Post-politicization is a particular set of dispositives:'
technical, managerial, institutional dispositive'
that suspends, colonizes, or [INAUDIBLE] the political.'
So, it's a set of dispositives that"
lets the political disappear, apparently.'
So, to that, it suggests what I mean by the political,'
it was already embedded in Michel Foucault's quote"
at the beginning.
"For me, the political of others, the political'
refers to the fact that the people do not exist."'
Well, in other words, that the people are radically,'
heterogeneously constituted, that we'
have radically different desires,'
dreams, feelings, sensibilities.
That there is no such thing as humanity, the people'
as a political category.
In fact, that is what under lies, of course,'
the promise of the democratic.
The promise of the democratic is nothing else'
that the recognition that the people do not exist,'
that the people are split, radically split.'
So, post-politicization is a particular tactic or strategy'
to pretend that the split is not there, to suspend it.'
The other tactics of doing so, Jacques Rancière,'
French political philosopher, identifies at least four'
different tactics of depoliticization.'
Let me give you a few examples of that.'
Archae-politics.
Archae-politics is the dispositive'
that argues that the community is inherently'
cohesive and fine, but it's disintegration,"
the heterogeneity that is expressed in community'
is cast by an external intruder.
The extreme form of that, of course,'
is the ultra-politics of fascism.'
Yet Trump is a good example of that.'
We Americans are fine.
But, to that end, the cohesion of us, the American community,'
is of course, the intruded that comes from outside.'
By doing so, this practice or rhetoric'
covers up the radical heterogeneity'
that cuts to the name, American, or Bostonian, or French.'
Meta-politics it is a tactic that Marxists--'
and I'm a bit of a Marxist, always was, always will be--"
it was a tactics that Marxist politics in the 20th century'
often mobilized erroneously.
So, I think the sort of standard argument where they say,'
"It\'s not politics, you stupid."
Where the dynamics of change and the possibilities'
of a different world, or the disintegrating world, resides,'
it's in the economy.
It is the class relationships.
You want to change the world, change the class system.'
There is nothing else than a tactic'
of displacing the terrain of the political onto something else,'
in this case, class struggle.
Also a form of suspending the democratic.'
So, post-politicization is one particular tactic,'
and it's characterized by a number of things."
Let me quickly go through the key characteristics'
of post-politicization, the way it'
has become increasingly entrenched'
in our cities over the past 20 years or so.'
First of all, post-politics is sustained'
by the continuous invocation of a permanent state of emergency,'
as Giorgio Agamben would call it.'
The permanent invocation of a state of crisis,'
and that articulates usually around four key axis:'
the economy, migration, security, and the environment.'
Dealing with a state of emergency, take immigration,'
dealing with a state of emergency'
requires urgent and immediate action,'
that of course, of necessity, suspends the slow, painful,'
and difficulty, Kapleau says, of democratic negotiation'
and inter-mediation.
Secondly, situations characterized'
by what Badiou already called in the late 90s, the economization'
of politics.
That means that only those political choices are possible,'
that fit onto a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet.'
In other words, only those political choices'
are deemed reasonable that fit within a market logic.'
Let me give you an example of that.'
I come from Flandres.
I grew up in a very small village in the 1960s.'
I am now a professor at the University'
of Manchester there, and giving a talk at GSD at Harvard.'
I never paid a penny for my education.'
I never paid a penny for my education.'
It was free and self-understood.
Unquestioned where I come from in Belgium.'
I'm still grateful to the extraordinary fights that"
were fought in order to make possible'
that mechanism of distribution over there,'
so that I was the first one out of my family'
to go to university, could end up'
as an emancipated speaker standing here.'
It's quite a trajectory of emancipation,"
would not have happened, I think, without that.'
If I were to say today, not in the US,'
because that would be unheard of,'
but in the UK, that education should be free for all who'
can and wish to participate in education,'
they consider me to be a dinosaur who'
has forgotten that the 20th century is forever over.'
That's what is meant by the economization of politics."
Because in urban governance, you see this repeated time'
after time again.
And that is strangely enough, paralleled'
by the depoliticized of the economic slash ecological.'
I understand the ecological, of course,'
as the process through which we transform nature, and allocate'
the fruits of that nature.
So, the economy not a very good term,'
it's basically the ecology, the ecological issue,"
that cannot be politicized.
In other words, there are no public choices'
possible about the way we access nature, transform nature,'
and allocate the product of that, both'
the goods and the bads of that.
Or, it can only be discussed to the extent'
that we reduce it to a techno-managerial issue.'
And all that is sustained by expert management,'
by us, who keep on reproducing these kind of knowledges'
as unquestionable.
Why is that done?
What makes it so attractive, so seductive?'
Why do so many of us desire this depoliticized configuration?'
I think Roberto Esposito, another Italian philosopher,'
comes up with partial answer when'
he says that what we have today is a further deepening of what'
Michel Foucault already identified'
as political governance, to what Esposito'
calls an immunological biopolitical governance.'
And immunological has to be understood'
as the process of suspension, of the obligation to participate'
in the community.
That is, right to have asylum from being piled off'
the polity.
Of course, neoliberal individualism precisely,'
the example embedding of that.
But if I take a sort of more mundane situation,'
is the environment, the ecological issue.'
We know is threatening us, don't we?"
And we try to mobilize all sort of techno-managerial'
dispositives in order to produce asylums,'
so that we're shielded off from the ecological,"
or the socio-ecological excesses that threaten us.'
That immunological biopolitical governance'
is, of course, a process of not just making life, deciding'
who is entitled to live.
That's my type.
I live in the gentrified, ecotopian bubble of Amsterdam.'
It's wonderful.
It's sustainable.
And it's damn smart, too.
But that comes extraordinary expense at the same time.'
We produce through that those who are not immunologized,'
those who are exiled.
The bottom of the Mediterranean Sea'
is filled with those bodies, which'
are the flip-side, of course, of the immunological biopolitical'
governance that is so dominant today.'
It\'s not just a process of, "make live."'
But it\'s process of "make live and make'
die," as two sides of the same coin.'
And all that is institutionally sustained'
by, what I and others have called,'
autocratic forms of post-democratic governance'
beyond the state.
That is, that the registers of instituted, quote'
unquote, "democratic governance,"'
or increasingly populated by what'
Ulrich Beck called unauthorized actors and unauthorized agents.'
It's what, in the planning literature,"
is usually called public-private partnerships, urban governance'
arrangements, in which not only the state participates,'
but all sorts of private agents and actors participate,'
some private companies to our beloved NGOs.'
But these are unauthorized actors.'
They have absolutely no democratic or other legitimacy.'
Nonetheless, they increasingly decide'
the techno-managerial structure of everyday governing.'
You can feel it in your body when'
you walk around in a city like Athens, or Thessaloniki today.'
You all know, of course, the chaos and the suffering'
that has been inflicted on the great people,'
and which is manifestly sensible in places'
like Athens and Thessaloniki, for all those who visit it,'
they know.
You feel it, you see it, you touch it, you smell it.'
All, of course, the direct outcome'
of post-political techno-managerial governance.'
Where there was no choice possible.'
Indeed, the conditions of crisis and of fear,'
which are continuously nurtured, the elites keep on telling us,'
can be nonetheless managed, for some,'
through demobilization or techno-managerial dispositives.'
And that is further sustained by what'
a colleague of mine in Manchester'
called, "the tyranny of participation."'
In planning, you find that whole time'
that democratization is understood'
as the participation of citizens in decision making processes'
We're telling our beloved poor in our cities,"
in the global north and global south,'
that it can and should participate'
in the decision making, the stuff that'
is important to them.
That's what we tell them.
"Do you participate, here in Boston,'
in the management of your sewage system, transport system,'
educational system, cultural policies, et cetera?"'
Perhaps some of you do.
I don't.
I don't have the time to do so.
I don't want to do that because it's"
techno-managerial exercise, and has absolutely nothing to do'
with the democratic.
The democratic has to do with the fact'
that if my water doesn't flow in Manchester, pick up the phone"
and say, "Hey, 15 minutes and I want it to be restored."'
That's democracy.
So, in this kind of configuration,'
the most important element of that'
is that the cultural condition that supports that'
is one that invites a dispute.
Dispute is not censored.
Dispute is, in fact, actively invited.'
Now, I am the master disputer.
I come up with all these critical theories and analyses,'
and my university loves me.
They pay me handsomely for it.
And I get invited to elite places'
to do this critical dispute of the situation that we are in.'
And people love it.
It's invited.
This is actually the support structured off.'
Of
However, while dispute is invited,'
while we are being invited to be whoever we want to be,'
in gender, cloth, ethnic, religious terms,'
some things are tabooed, or censored.'
That is the dispute, the radical censors,'
as Jacques Rancière would call it,'
over different forms of life, different forms of urbanity,'
that articulate around radically different political choices.'
If I were to say, "I want to fight'
for a city of the common," that would be just about acceptable,'
it I dress it up nicely.
If I were to say, "I want a communist city,"'
I may, next time, not get a visa to get into the US,'
given what I read this morning in the newspaper.'
So, Fukuyama-- for those old enough may just remember'
Fukuyama's idiotic book in 1992, The End of History,"
where he got Hegel completely wrong, I thought at the time,'
in my youthful arrogance--
now, 30-odd years later, Fukuyama'
may not have been a great [INAUDIBLE],'
but his announcement of the end of history'
sounds chillingly true today.
Now this strange sense of consensus'
among the liberal elites that have governed over the past 20'
years, that sustain this ideal of an unfractured possibility,'
of unfractured society, is of course ruthlessly disturbed'
by the fragmenting forces that animate'
so much of our urban life.
So, the fragmenting forces, the flip side, so to speak,'
of this attempt to eradicate the political'
from the spaces of social and policy'
encountered all the fragmenting forces that operate that,'
on the one hand, the lure of identity,'
what [INAUDIBLE] and others called,'
"ethnic evil," which, of course, is animating so much'
of our urban everyday lives.
This is a Golden Dawn in Athens, and you all'
know what that symbol stands for.'
That is the eruptions of urban, violent, dissensual outbursts,'
whether you're talking about terrorist attacks, too just"
anarchic outbursts of violence.
These anarchic outbursts of violence,'
such as those in Manchester, and London, or Paris, Stockholm,'
and many other places--
and there will be more, I promise you there will be more.'
Read my lips, you don't have to be a genius"
to know that that will continue to happen.'
However, the elites keep on insisting'
that those who engage in that are archae scum, like those'
who vote for Trump, right?
And of course, it is that identification'
that embodies that disavowal of the political.'
But on the other hand, the other type'
of fragmenting voices, forces, are'
those who want to fight for the new universalization.'
That is, those who's return to, what Badiou calls"
the "Passion of the Real."
The real of the common under the banner of equality.'
Those who, in their urban insurgent acting,'
prefigured tentatively, hesitantly,'
and with many uncertainties, and without much help'
from our types, who try to prefigure,'
democratically, the practice of being'
in common, and who are experimenting, in many places,'
a citizen of the world with new ways of organizing common life'
democratically.
And occasionally, not very often--'
when I gave this talk five years ago, I couldn't say this--"
but today, we can see that some of these outbursts'
are politically performative.
As one, I guess, now knows, Ada Colau,'
the new mayor of Barcelona, who was just a few years ago'
put in jail because he was protesting with the Indignados.'
And, of course, in Greece, he resides'
in power, the first radical left government'
in the postwar period in Greece, though'
not in part of these urban insurrectional movements.'
So, in order to make sense of that,'
I think it's important to make a distinction between politics"
on the one hand, and the political on the other,'
which are two worlds that coexist simultaneously'
in the urban.
In French, we have such beautifully gendered language.'
It's called le politic and la politic."
It's very difficult to translate into English,"
but it's commonly translated as politics,"
which is the antek, that is, the empirically verifiable tactics'
and strategies of urban governance,'
with its rituals, its practices, its actors, and ages.'
It's the kind of stuff that you and I are usually very good at."
Now, give me a city for a week, and I'll"
do a the analysis of its urban governance systems.'
I could do that blindfoldedly.
It is the arctic level of politics.'
Now, we seem to have reduced our thought'
about and our considerations of urban governing'
to these practices of governing, as'
if that colonizes the whole of the political field.'
The political, in contrast, is ontological,'
as some of my interlocutors would argue.'
The political is the name, the word that stands for the fact'
that we disagree.
It stands for the radical heterogeneity that'
cuts through the social, and it is'
that that manifests itself, that becomes'
symptomatically present urban those outbursts,'
that's when you see it.
So, theoretically there are a number'
of theoretical genealogies.
It was Paul Ricœur, who already in the 60s made that'
distinction, but now there are a whole series of philosophical'
and political arguments that circulate around this'
post-foundational thought.
Post-foundational thought that is that the political is'
nothing else than radical heterogeneity'
that cuts through the social, and that manifests itself,'
occasionally in antagonism.
What happens if we add democratic to the political?'
And it's something that we urban theorists,"
or urban intellectuals, very rarely think about again.'
How many books are there about the democratic,'
the urban democratic of the past 20 years'
compared to books on urban politics, and other governance,'
so poor I can't read them anymore."
So, let me remind you of a few things of what the democratic'
is, symptomatically.
What the democratic invention, contingent as it was,'
insisted on.
It insists, of course, on the empty place of power,'
as Claude Leford would have it, that anyone and everyone can,'
at least temporarily, claim the place of power.'
But most importantly, it presumes equality.'
Equality, understood as the axiomatic capacity of each'
and all to act politically.
Contrast that with the notion of social equality,'
we all know we are socially unequal.'
Right?
Marxists, feminists, post-colonialists'
have explored, in great detail, the various social inequalities'
that animate urban life and progressive politics,'
etching itself on these inequalities set.'
We have to remedy that.
That is a perversion of the democratic.'
The foundation of the democratic is the presumption'
of equality of each and all who are speaking beings,'
irrespective of the social place we take'
in the geographical edifice.
And the democratic is nothing else than the assertion of what'
Balibar would call, "Égaliberté."'
Freedom and equality fused together.'
And it is precisely this, what I would argue, is being suspended'
and disavowed in our post-democratic cities.'
And it's precisely in such a condition,"
that the democratic, as an insurgent practice,'
manifests itself occasionally.
So, here we begin to have I would argue a sense of what'
these insurgent architects are all about in their first'
forming act of insurgent democracy,'
because they are acutely aware, of course, that's"
just the [? fundaments. ?] So, the political,'
then, I understand as a retroactively'
revealed moment of eruption.
An event, in Badiou's term.
One that is always placed and geographical and decidedly'
urban that opens up a procedure that disrupts any given'
social spatial order.
It's one that addresses a wrong, in the name of a contingent"
and utterly axiomatic presumption of equality'
of each and every one.
This wrong is a condition in which'
the presumption of equality is perverted to the institution'
of an oligarchic police.
We live today in an oligarchic police order.'
The political advises, then, in the act'
of performatively staging equality, a procedure that'
simultaneously stages equality, so it's not"
us, the master philosophers, who decide what equality is, but is'
in the performative acting, in the bodily performance'
in space, that the very content and substance of equality'
is being defined.
And it demonstrates the possibility'
for the inauguration of a new instituted order.'
This sounds very theoretical.
Let me give you a simple example.'
Montgomery, Alabama, in 1955, African-American woman called'
Rosa Parks--
I'm sure you all remember her, she"
died two or three years ago--
she put African-American bum on the wrong seat of the bus.'
We all know the story?
Many had done this before.
What happened when you do something like that,'
as happened with her?
You get beaten up, thrown off the bus, put in jail, or worse.'
Right?
Why do we remember Rosa Parks in her minimal displacement,'
but which, nonetheless, constituted,'
retroactively, a political event in which she demonstrated'
alone, the initial Italian order of racialists,'
racialized configuration, and demonstrated equality'
at the same time.
It is in the subsequent universalizing a procedure'
whereby other the Americans and non-Americans,'
African-Americans and non-African-Americans, women'
and men, old and young, said, "I am Rosa Parks too."'
And we call it today the civil rights movement.'
Was it a democratizing movement?
Yes, it was.
Is it perfect?
No, not by a long way.
So, we may begin--
I'm going to conclude now-- we may begin to get a sense here"
of what insurgent urban democratic acting is all about.'
For me, the sort of performativities'
where the democratic is kept alive'
against all these suturing attempts'
of the institutional order to suspend this.'
That is, that insurgent democracy operates,'
as Miguel Abensour argues, against the state,'
or at a distance from the state.
It is, as Badiou would call, a politics of subtraction.'
It falls in public space outside of the institute of spaces,'
of governance.
The political is no foundational place, location, or subject,'
it's a process of common subjectivation."
My Marxist friends hate this statement, because of course,'
Marxists would say, "It\'s class, you stupid."'
Well, it ain't.
If I look at the composition of this insurgent, urbanist,'
preferly heterogeneous, the men and women'
of all sort of ethnic, religious composition, that'
cut through the indentitarian embodiments,'
in the name of a universalizing equality, which they consider'
to be the very condition of possibility, to have that'
embody differences.
But you have to want it.
It's a desire that you have to want."
So, that's another thing my Marxist friends don't like."
It's a process of becoming subject"
that is the will to take sides.
Insurgent democratic acting is always specific.'
It's always concrete.
It's always particular.
Remember Istanbul, 2013, Gezi Park was about a few'
[INAUDIBLE] trees and a badly designed mosque'
that assembled several hundred thousand people who,'
after a few weeks, were demanding a transformation'
of the Constitution.
I would argue we can not understand what is happening'
