Good evening.
Good evening, everyone.
Thanks for coming out on a night that's"
precariously close to the end of the semester.'
But no surprise to see a great turnout this evening.'
On behalf of Anita Berrizbeitia, and the Dean,'
and the Department of Landscape Architecture,'
it's my true pleasure to welcome you to tonight's lecture"
by our dear friend, Kathryn Gustafson.'
Always great to have you here.
In the last few days, anticipating'
Kathryn's appearance here at GSD,"
I've been thinking about the feeling of real joy"
and intrigue in witnessing the emergence of Kathryn's practice"
in the 1990s, when she was working primarily in Europe.'
This was in the aftermath of the la Villette competition'
in Paris, when it seemed, for a while,'
that the programmatic ordering and rhetorical posturing'
of Bernard Tschumi and Rem Koolhaas'
could even dominate landscape architecture discourse'
for a good amount of time.
Turns out, it did do that.
And that trajectory produced a useful and productive'
conversation about the horizontal surface of the city'
as landscape infrastructure.
And that trajectory is well known to us.'
And we really had few design heroes,'
few people to emulate in landscape'
architecture in that period.
It was a dry period, I think.
It was for me anyway.
Dan Kiley, we had.
I had great teachers here, Peter Walker and Laurie Olin.'
We had Michel [? Kordju, ?] one of your teachers.'
[? Alexonne ?] [? Schemitov, ?] another.'
And a handful of others, but not many.'
It was as if we were in search of voices reflecting a deeper'
engagement with the essential qualities of landscapes.'
Kathryn's work came forward from a very different place"
from all of that conversation.
And, for me, her firm's work helped give voice"
to more essential traditions and sources'
for landscape architecture.
Without recourse to architectural polemics,'
or picturesque nostalgia, it seemed'
that the sources of her work were'
neither rhetorical nor polemical.'
They were rooted in the sensual, the earth bound, the vegetal,'
the visceral, the experimental, the experiential,'
and the personal, the experience of the body and space.'
Layered compositions that seemed to be'
born of other references, other experiences of Kathryn's"
love for fashion, a deep knowledge of fabric'
and sculpted form, and, importantly,'
her devotion to the garden.
We were seeing very studied shapes'
that seemed to derive from a love of earthwork.'
Forms we hadn't seen, even, applied to commissions"
that were not easy to build.
By the time the projects for the Shell Oil Company and the Diana'
Memorial had come, the world had really'
taken notice of this practice.
And the Lurie Garden in the States'
became an iconic touchstone just after that.'
Here in Boston, the Museum of Fine Arts Evans Wing'
and the North End parks raised the ante,'
which hasn't been high enough here in Boston"
for the public realm.
As the commissions have become larger and far more complex'
than the early work, essential and layered qualities'
in the work have remained, and even intensified.'
The more recent projects in Valencia, Singapore, and the US'
continue to be consistently inspired, beguiling,'
and original.
Of particular note, and broadly acclaimed,'
is the recently opened and truly remarkable'
work of the National Museum of African-American History'
and Culture in Washington with David Adjaye and Phil Freelon.'
Looking forward to hearing more about Kathryn's"
current preoccupations this evening.'
Some of us know what it's like to build a firm"
and keep it thriving for a long time.'
It's gratifying and rewarding.
But it's also complicated and challenging."
Uniquely, Kathryn is the founding partner and principal'
designer of two firms, Gustafson Porter + Bohman in London'
and Gustafson Guthrie Nicol in Seattle.'
When she made the decision to return to the States'
to be closer to her family in Seattle'
now, maybe 20 years ago, she joined forces'
with the brilliant Jennifer Guthrie and Shannon Nicol'
to build GGN.
A great move, something we've all benefited from."
Kathryn is an honorary fellow of the Royal British'
Institute of Architects, a medalist of the French Academy'
of Architecture, fellow of the American Society of Landscape'
Architects, one of the two, I think, landscape architect'
recipients of the Brunner Prize, the Obayashi Prize,'
the ASLA Design Medal--
very hard to get that--
the Chrysler Design Award, London's Jane Drew Prize."
The list goes on.
In 2011, Kathryn and her partners at GGN'
received the Smithsonian's Cooper Hewitt National Design"
Award for landscape architecture,'
another very coveted accolade.
All these aside, I'm aware that Katherine finds a way"
to spend a lot of her mornings and some long days reading'
about plants and tending to her garden'
on one of those amazing islands in the San Juans.'
I like to think the real prize for her as a designer is just'
that, living in the garden.
Please join me in a warm welcome for Kathryn Gustafson.'
[APPLAUSE]
Influences.
So, I've sort of put this lecture together."
It's sort of a pre-lecture.
It's something I've been working on for a while of,"
why do we do what we do?
And how do you, especially because you're students,"
or some of you are professionals,'
is, why does a design happen?
Where does it come from?
Where does it come from?
And to also help you kind of pay attention'
to where things come from for you.'
And I have this thing that I call SLAT.'
And I actually have it tattooed on my wrist.'
And I call it stop, look, and think.'
Stop, listen, and think.
Stop, learn, and allow time.
And really, how does landscape feel and why?'
In the end, you and I are creating a place'
for human beings to be in.
And we have to understand how that feels.'
And that takes time.
It's not this, like, one off idea."
Oh.
I'll do that.
No.
I mean, it's a real complicated process."
I love what Georgia O'Keeffe said."
Make your unknown known.
Every individual is different and we're"
different because of our influences.'
So this is where I came from, a high plateau'
desert, Yakima, Washington.
And you'll notice, if I can get the pointer to work,"
that all these soft tones, because we have no rain,'
is mountains that do dams and irrigation.'
But as soon as you add water, you have this bright green.'
So it's a little bit like Campbell's Soup."
Just add water.
And it means that I was raised in this place'
with these naked mountains.
And I've always felt like Earth is organic, like we are."
And those curves are like our curves.'
They're liquid.
They're not like rock.
OK?
So we're made of liquids.
And at the base of these, what you see is the--'
excuse me.
Am I going to get this wrong?
Yep.
OK, I'm going to get used to this."
At the base of this, this is apples.'
And everything is done by irrigation,'
so everybody says, why do you do water everywhere?'
I was born in a place with no water.'
And every piece of water was absolutely precious.'
And so you can see what I call the water line.'
As soon as it's not irrigated, it's gravelly plain."
And water is not a natural thing.'
It's a conducted thing.
It's a precious thing that moves through."
And this is what it creates.
This huge abundance of fruit, hops, beer.'
So this is where I was raised.
And then I ended up going here, to Versailles,'
which is where I did my master's degree."
Where everything is constructed.
Where all the water is constructed.'
Everything has a form, has a definition.'
And this is where I learned about monumentality.'
These are the 100 Steps.
And they're my most favorite steps in the world,"
because you're going up to a horizon."
It's like climbing a mountain, but it's"
a human cultural mountain.
You want to get to the top to see what you find at the top.'
So that's an experiential, all right?"
It's like, I've got to go there.
I've got to see what's at the top."
And nothing's telling you what's at the top,"
except there's a few trees that there might"
be another existence up there.
So understanding how a landscape feels.'
This is another huge influence.
This is a man named Jacques [? Sgard. ?]'
And I went to this park, Parc de Vincennes,'
when I was trying to make the decision'
to leave fashion design for landscape architecture.'
And these are sculpture forms he did late '60s."
And I actually stood on this hillside.'
Look at the steepness of that.
And said, I got to do this.
If you can make this thing sculptural art,'
the unusual experience?
I mean, look at this kid.
Look at the angle of that.
Everything is designed.
It's intentional.
The experience is intentional.
And it just made me fall in love with the idea'
of doing this profession.
Then there's obviously Noguchi, who said, hey,"
you can do art and landscape.
And you can make it just like, this most amazing thing.'
And then there's Dennis Oppenheim."
I don't know if you know him.
He's a bit of an artist artist.
He had a huge influence in my life.'
And this is a piece, Parallel Stress,'
and it's his stress of his body against the earth."
He also did this piece that I absolutely'
love that is called Service Station for Ideas.'
So your ideas come around and like,'
you're not quite ready for them.
So they may need to get a little bit more gas in them'
or a little bit more service.
But it's also a three dimensional landscape piece"
that could be built out in the middle of nowhere.'
And so it has this conceptual piece'
to it and at the same time a reality to form.'
Then there is my very good friend, Igor Mitoraj,'
who I met in France wanting him to do a sculpture for one'
of my first projects in a very hard neighborhood'
with a lot of immigrants, a lot of violence, a lot of stress.'
And he looked at my models and said,'
what are you doing with them?
And I said well, when I'm done, I throw them away."
He said no.
He brought me tools from [? Carrara. ?]'
He taught me to sculpt clay.
He took time to mentor me for over two years.'
Huge influence in my life.
A wonderful man.
So, part of this lecture is about, why beauty?'
What is important about beauty?
And David Brooks, I love this.
Beauty conquers the deadening aspects of routine.'
It educates the emotion, connects us to the eternal,'
by arousing the senses.
Beauty arouses thought and spirit.'
John Donahue, The Invisible Embrace.'
We feel most alive in the presence of beauty,'
for it meets the needs of our soul.'
Without beauty, the search for truth, the desire for goodness,'
the love of order and unity, would be but sterile options.'
Exploits.
I think a lot of time in landscape,'
we sort of forget about the experiential.'
And I often wonder about what is it'
about art that carries us through every piece?'
And why are there certain things that carry over time?'
And it's the human spirit.
So, the bowl of fruit.
You can see a Dutch painting, you can see a van Gogh,'
and you can see a contemporary installation.'
But they're all doing fruit.
And so they are doing fruit because it feeds us.'
It is essential to our nourishment.'
And so we find beauty in something'
that is very spiritual.
But then we contextualize it with our culture.'
So it's influence of our culture,"
but there is something about us that connects us all together'
as the human spirit.
I love this painting by Matisse, because it talks about--'
part of the things I want to talk to you about'
is, what is the influence of art on landscape architecture?'
So I go through and I look at art.'
I look at art all the time.
But why has Matisse decided this is beautiful?'
OK, so take a painting, analyze it.'
This has a river below, reflecting light up.'
The pathway is in prospect looking over.'
The pathway is protected on the side, dominance.'
So, when you're designing a landscape,"
think about what the experiential at that landscape'
is.
This is also a Matisse, which I find really interesting'
in that, he's taken the river.
He's pulled the light into the room."
He's made the room pull water into the room and life"
into the room from the river into a cultural situation'
into a living room.
So that carrying from one natural aspect'
or into a more intimate aspect is also part of designing.'
This is another Matisse that I find'
quite extraordinary because it talks about the future.'
OK?
I am sorry, it's very hard to always photograph paintings."
But see how the pathway turns, so you want to go that way?'
See the void here?
The void is saying, you're going to go someplace."
See the shadow here?
It's highlighting the light on this side, the light here."
See the solid wall here.
Everything's taking you to a place."
Everything's leading you to a place."
And so just drawing a line on a plan is not going to do it.'
It is much more about this whole piece.'
And I think when looking at art and seeing,'
why does an artist think this is beautiful,'
will give you clues of how to create them.'
So this is a Monet.
So you have to know European landscape'
to understand what this means.
This means a cemetery.
This evergreen is probably a Taxus baccata.'
This means over here there's probably a house."
So this meadow says, I'm safe.
I've got a cemetery.
I got a house.
I'm not in the middle of nowhere."
I'm taken care of.
I have warm sunshine.
I've got distant horizons.
I've got safeness from view.
It's saying, safe, comfortable, home, warm."
So I think it's really interesting"
that it creates an ambiance.
Now this is one of the picturesque paintings'
that influenced many.
And the thing I find interesting about this one'
is that it talks about those three scales'
that we're always dealing from, foreground, meeting ground,"
farground.
So, what is an immediacy, right now?'
What could happen?
And what do you want to happen?
And so those three scales are something'
that happens in landscape all the time.'
Stowe is a really good [? acts. ?]'
If you haven't traveled to Stowe, please go."
It is the true picturesque.
Not what I call civic decoration that really ruined'
the picturesque in the 1800s.
But the 1730s, it was really about creating'
a readability of the land and a discovering of the land.'
And so this is what I call--
excuse me, I got it wrong.
I got the thing wrong.
Go back.
This is what I call the object of desire.'
So you want to go see this, but there's no pathway."
There's a visual corridor.
The whole pathway takes you around and then you'
also you discover all these other pieces.'
This is a series of paintings and references.'
And next summer are some of our projects.'
And I'm just trying to show you how"
that influence of those paintings'
have influenced the way I design.'
And so this is called the journey.'
And sitting there and saying, what is the journey?'
And then what is around the corner of that journey?'
This is amplification of a natural piece.'
So my waterfall isn't quite as big."
But it talks about that same feeling.'
This is theatrical.
It's turn on one side.
This is a ribbon, 1,000 meters of gold ribbon'
through the woods that take you on a journey,'
as this takes you on a journey someplace.'
And then, very important, and a little bit'
what the interdiction talked about,'
I love classical principles.
I think there is a balance to them.'
I think there is a principle to them.'
I think there is a force to them, that they have something.'
The reason they're classical, they've been around"
for forever, is they work.
You know?
And so, what is it about them that works so beautifully?'
And then this comes back to those three scales.'
Foreground, meeting ground round, farground.'
Foreground, meeting ground, farground.'
And so always working in that concept into the work.'
I represent first my previous work'
in Paris from 1980 to 1997, then Gustafson Porter Bowman 1997'
to now.
And then the beautiful women at GGN and myself,'
from 1999 to present.
So this is the London office.
Neil Porter, Mary Bowman, me, new partners, Sibylla'
and Donncha.
And this is them.
And this is the three women of Gustafson Guthrie Nicol.'
And then this is sort of a group photo of that office.'
And we also have an office in D.C. So everything'
that I will show you, I have been design lead on.'
But that doesn't mean it's everything"
that's been done in the office.
Obviously, we're 90 people strong now."
We're nine partners.
There's no way I'm designing all of this."
Thank god, or I'd be nuts.
Through all the offices, this is our mantra.'
It is complicated.
You don't just do a one off and design a really good landscape."
There's all these things that you have to get in there."
And you can read it.
You should know it.
But if your project isn't fulfilling every one of those,"
then you haven't done your job.
See if I can go forward.
In Paris, this is actually my very first project, 1983.'
It's called Meeting Point.
And I'm not going to go too much into the conceptualization"
of it.
But it was basically about different systems.'
How they meet.
And what do they do with each other when they meet?'
So an example is that this is a really strong system.'
This is a very fluid system.
So [? the strong ?] system tries to cut through the fluid.'
The fluid doesn't care.
It just floats right over it.
So, in life there are different elements that come together.'
And how they react to each other is constantly changing.'
It's actually is a storm water management piece."
We were moving 300,000 cubic meters of earth'
to be able to drain all the fields around here'
from flooding during the spring rains.'
This is a photo of that was taken just last spring.'
So it's still a wonderful piece.
It's still there.
And it doesn't look quite as sculptural anymore."
But it looks like it fits.
And that's really sort of what matters."
This is Every Rights of Man 1990.'
It's first time I put jets on pavement"
and have that be a unique space.
Turn off the jets, and you have a performance space'
that everybody can use.
This is where the term full and empty and empty when full.'
You want a space that, when nobody's there, is full,"
so it's non-boring, right?
Like, the Boston Civic Center is horrible when it's empty."
So then, you also want that space, when it's full,"
that people can fill it.
So how do you make it flexible to be both?'
And this was a performance space that'
was based on the 13th Amendment rights of man'
in French called freedom of expression.'
And Francois Mitterrand opened the piece.'
So this is Shell Petroleum.
Very iconic, everybody knows it.
But it's basically the first roof garden."
There's five stories of parking underneath it."
And it's a very conceptual space about what"
Shell Petroleum does.
They basically go into the rock, they take out the fluid,'
they refine it, and they give us energy.'
So it was the front door to Shell.'
And it was a way to talk about energy in a positive way'
when we had just had Valdez happen six months before.'
And it's an incredibly great company."
This is a project--
I'm showing you old pieces and new pieces."
This is a project that a lot of people haven't seen."
And I wanted to put it in here because I'm still"
super proud of it.
And it shows, for people who are starting out,'
I did a lot of infrastructure in the beginning.'
And this was a project.
This is the A4 that comes from Paris'
all the way down to Italy.
And this is the A55 that goes to Barcelona.'
And this goes into the center of Marseille.'
And the client asked us to take all of this'
and make a new entry to Marseille'
and put in one million cubic yards of soil that'
was coming out of a tunnel.
To do it, and make it a sculptural piece.'
So one thing to notice is there are'
remnants of the pine forest.
And you see this rock strata across here.'
So this is a 1960s freeway exchange that just like,'
ripped through the earth.
So how to put a million cubes in there is the basic idea.'
I'm going to go back one.
I have 100 meter grade change from here down here.'
So this is a really steep slope.
There's agricultural plains here."
And this is my first sketch saying,'
OK, you got to build walls so you can fill in these areas.'
See these black pieces are walls.'
And then, from all the freeways, you've"
got to collect all the water.
And we had to store the water someplace to slow it down.'
It's also a tribute to four men that died in my life"
within two years.
So two brothers, two good friends.'
So each color represents another man.'
So, a pretty emotional piece for me.'
So this is the big walls here that give you directionality.'
These are collecting all the water coming down.'
This is the main retention basin.'
These are terraces that move up that are'
of the native planting.
And then these are the agricultural plains'
to represent all the fields that are part of that plain here.'
Then this is an olive grove that connects'
to the olive groves over here, the pine forests'
reconnected across.
This is the model.
And this was the first model I did in the United States'
when I moved back here in 1997.
Actually, this was done in '95.
And it's 300 pounds of clay.
But you can see here--
sorry-- that this is where the storm water collects.'
And these are the terraces coming down.'
I'm going to go back one.
I'm sorry, the two buttons here between forward and pointer"
are both green, so I get slightly confused.'
So the storm water collects here.'
And this is a land movement all the way down.'
And these are these huge walls that retain this.'
So that shows you where the water is collected.'
This is first time I did 3D.
This is Form Z. I do Form Z. I do 3D.'
I admit I can't do it anymore.
I can't do Rhino because everybody's faster than me now."
But, I do know the principles.
And I did do this model.
And this is what it looks like.
So, you have these great big, huge walls'
that are holding up the earth.
And then this is that big basin.
And then you see these water lines?'
They're actually measuring and showing"
the public how much impermeabilization'
has been going on.
And it shows how much water has been retained.'
This is what it looked like before.'
And this is what we filled in.
So those walls, you're going to see them in a minute,"
came across here on the terraces here.'
And we actually got these pylons in the same place,'
but just raised up.
And all of this is using local stone in gabion walls.'
You can see the size of a truck.
It's an absolutely monumental piece."
You cannot visit it.
You can only see it at approximately 60 miles an hour.'
So it's like [SNAPS].
So at the top of the columns is horizontal.'
The lines are horizontal.
And the base is not.
And so that fills with water.
Back to what was done September in the American'
Museum of African-American History and Culture'
was one of the most extraordinary experiences'
I've had.
The landscape had this huge challenge'
of being in one of America's most historical sites."
And the pressures were extraordinary.'
It took us nine years to build it.'
David Adjaye and Phil Freelon were the architects.'
The biggest compliment I had was from the critic for the New'
York Times, I believe, said it's a great understatement."
And I couldn't have had a nicer compliment in such a context."
Because it's the last thing you want to do"
is try to upstage the Washington Monument and David Adjaye.'
Not a great idea.
So I just want you to look at all Olin's work here,"
all our work.
We're fitting into a larger context."
So this is the inspiration for David's museum."
The idea of a hat in Africa means'
that you control your destiny, that you actually'
have property, that you actually have something.'
So it's an honor to have a hat.
And you can see in the African-American culture,'
hats are still really important.
Also, the porch was very important to this concept.'
I think you all know where we are.'
So the museum is here.
This is the Capitol, the White House, Lincoln.'
This is called Union Square.
We're going to talk about it in a bit."
The Mall.
The Reflection Pool, Washington Monument,'
the Museum of American History.
Now our director, Lonnie Bunch, was the director'
of American History before.
You don't get more sensitive in America than a site like this."
Everybody, everybody has an opinion.'
Everybody has friends of this, or friends'
on the Mall, the Washington Planning'
Commission, the National Institution of Arts.'
The process?
You just can't get nervous about it."
You just take your time.
You just keep working through it and through it'
to make sure that you're getting the right answer for everybody"
in the room.
It's no longer about you.
It really isn't about you.
It really is about this context within the monumental core,'
within the capital of this nation.'
And that is important to a lot of people.'
So I'm trying to understand that importance of the friends"
of the Washington Monument, the oval, American Museum'
of History, and our new museum.
We have a nine foot, three meter drop from here to here.'
If you know the Mall, you come across'
and then you have this like ha-ha that goes lower here,'
so cars can go through here and your view'
across to the Washington Monument never has cars on it.'
It's beautifully designed.
Olin did an extraordinary job redesigning this'
with all the security barriers that'
look like there's no security barriers whatsoever."
It's one of the most brilliant landscape"
designs in the Washington D.C. and, actually, I'
believe, in the world.
So, looking at that, analyzing how that works,'
there's these terraces that step down and then all these lines"
that connect to everything.
We have to figure out a place to put this museum so it'
doesn't flood from Constitution, so it placed halfway between."
70% of our people come in this way.'
30% come in the other direction.
This is my first model.
I think it's kind of funny that it looks like a fish."
You know, I got the fish, got his eye, his tail.'
He's about to swim away.
That everybody that came in crossed waters.'
And so they crossed on a boat.
There was something so really wanted conceptually'
that you crossed water to come into the museum.'
You cross the threshold of some sort.'
And then-- sorry.
This is in the same green stuff keep.'
I keep having dyslexia with green.'
OK, pointer.
So again, getting it to fit into the context.'
So fitting into the context and still having'
that museum be its own place.
And David and I, right it in the beginning,'
said, OK, what we really want is we want the pavilion in a park,'
because you have the Washington Monument grounds.'
It's a huge park.
You're not going to create this little garden on the side."
You're trying to make this.
And David is trying to put this museum there'
that is finishing museum row.
So it's very important.
So these were the different processes'
that we went to say, OK, this is what it looks like today.'
This is what it's going to look like in the future."
This is what it looks like from the Washington Monument today.'
And this is how it's going to look in the future."
This is the final plan during schematic.'
And you're going to see, it does change"
where the museum is here.
You cross water over.
This was a storm water management piece here'
that was collecting all the water from the site here.'
And this was a cultural fountain that you crossed water'
to enter.
And so you move through the museum.'
Remember there's a nine foot drop."
We're right in the middle here.
That puts above flood line of Constitution.'
One of the things about studying the aspect of the movement'
to the north is it was really important how much'
the lantern was, the moon was.
The moon showed you how to go along the river.'
The river showed you how to get places.'
And then there was the safe house.'
And the safe house had quilts.
And if the quilt was out, it was safe.'
If the candle was in the window, it was safe.'
If they weren't, it wasn't safe.
And so there's all this symbolism"
through this culture that's very important."
And in that, the lantern was one of the main pieces'
right at the entry that David really wanted.'
And he wanted it to convey light down below of the museum.'
You see three stories above.
There are five stories below.
The majority of the museum is underground.'
It is enormous.
And [? Applebon ?] has done a fantastic job.'
If you haven't been, you must go."
It's extraordinary what they did."
And David did a great job.
This is our landscape trying to marry'
the reflection of the museum's facade itself"
in our stonework and the coordination of the colors'
and the pieces, really trying to make it feel like it's"
one piece, one experience.
Part of that was that there are these circles of stories.'
And they're called singing circles."
Of course, we always do huge amount of research.'
And these singing circles are where the stories are told.'
And Lonnie wanted us to do a series of circles.'
And so this is the drawings for spirituality.'
This is for hope and optimism.
It's the only one we were able to build, showing"
the hand that is holding.
And doing the hope and optimism, we built it out of metal.'
We do a lot of furniture also.
And this is it built. And so it will be a place, hopefully,'
that's not too hot once those trees grow up,"
because it is in metal, that is a place of meeting'
because Lonnie wants to be able to go outside and tell stories'
about the culture and about the history.'
The north side is a fountain.
And this is where the porch comes in.'
And this is David's porch.
And putting the crossing waters fountain here, but also'
using that to bounce the light off this'
and reflect to the understory of this.'
And the wind is constantly moving this.'
So this is moving.
But there is also this concept here about agitation and calm.'
And so in the history, there is agitation.'
There's the agitation throughout history"
with the African-American experience in America.'
But then there's calm.
And then there's solidness.
And so the fountain is made up of two pieces, a movement piece'
and a mirror piece.
And the movement piece comes down'
and the mirror piece comes across.'
And there's a void between them.
And they never touch.
And that void goes all the way down to the basement,'
so you have these two waters that come in and go down.'
And when you are in, looking out at the mirror piece,'
you see yourself reflected, the Washington Monument reflected.'
So you see yourself within the history of the United States.'
So this is a CGI of that, showing'
the movement water, the still water, the Washington Monument.'
This is my drawing of the movement.'
I used the movement of birds, called'
the [? hirondelle ?] in France.
Those little birds that all move in [? murmurs ?] like,'
oh, I don't know what you call them in English."
But do you ever watch those birds?'
They know exactly where each other are.'
And they move like this group.
And I felt as a symbolism to this group'
of African-Americans, as a community, as in agitation they'
are a community.
So I used that to create the texture for the agitation.'
And these are the process you go through.'
And this is what it gives today.
So you see the mirror piece and the agitation.'
And the work between the landscape and the architecture.'
So then David has the sod, which is,'
I don't know if you've been, but it is pretty amazing."
So these are his models.
And then one day, he shows up with this.'
It's dropped dead gorgeous.
I mean, it's just like, you going to do what?"
And that's going to be your facade?"
Entire molded bronze?
No.
OK.
We can't do molded bronze.
We can't afford it.
But then there's the mock up.
And you just fall in love with it.'
You've never seen anything like it"
in Washington or anyplace else in the world.'
And it's just absolutely beautiful."
And it's based on the iron work in New Orleans and traditions."
So there was [? a VE ?] of the landscape'
to save the facade of the building.'
And it's called Save the Corona.
And so, you can see this water feature disappear.'
There's a few other things that disappeared in the landscape."
I think we're actually lucky we saved as much as we could."
But it actually created this wonderful opportunity'
to create this new wall.
And can you figure out that scale?'
Like it's like a whole block long."
It's five meters wide.
It's 30 inches high.
It is big.
It is black.
It is polished granite.
And it is a security wall for blasts.'
I love this wall.
I mean, it was so much better than the water feature.'
It is so bold.
The top is totally polished so it looks like water.'
And then the front is totally this--'
you have to cross through it.
And it has been beautifully built, beautifully crafted,'
that you can touch it.
It's sensual.
It's my big, beautiful black wall."
And guess what?
It has become the biggest hangout place.'
It's full.
In the sun, that stone gets warm.'
Everybody hangs out on it.
The food trucks come.
Everybody eats lunch there.
It has become this natural gathering place.'
Who would have thought?
And it's still in the calm, lights water"
reflects the museum.
One last thing blue is really important color.'
The beads in slave houses meant that it's"
passing through a threshold.
It's a safe place.
So we looked at crocuses for National Black Month,'
African-American Month.
And we planted 360,000 of them.
And still, just a wonderful place that understatement'
was a really nice complement.
It will be nice when the trees get slightly bigger.'
And it also was great to see the Women's March."
This is Hong Kong.
It's called Taikoo Plaza.
And this is my first foray into China.'
I'm not sure we can call Hong Kong China but it's sort of."
And it's a private development.
Everything that is dark letters, my client owns it.'
And they own all the streets, also, by the way.'
It's a company that's been around for a long time"
called Swires.
And when aisle in the east is I think 78 stories.'
It's the weirdest interview I've ever had in my life."
The first time I was there, they had me'
up at the 75th story in a desk at an office'
right next to the piece of glass that went right to the floor.'
And I don't like elevators.
I made it through, but from then on everything was fine.'
They moved me to a lower floor.
But the project was that this had buildings on it.'
And so, they wanted to build two new towers here.'
So they tore down these buildings,'
built underground parking garage,'
and then there's a new bridge here up in the air"
the first floor that connects everything in space.'
And then these were all loading docks,'
and creating this in to food and beverage,'
a new garden here, and then an event street over here.'
So we're doing all of that.
And, at the time--
somebody asked me today, do you ever do something political.'
Yeah, I do but I don't often tell people about it."
So this is during Occupy Hong Kong.'
When I was first doing the concept, so tradition,'
transparency, and transition.
A lot of the problem with Occupy Hong Kong'
is nobody wanted to lose that tradition'
but they wanted transparency in this transition'
to this government.
And so it was very important these three words.'
So they became the concept for this space.'
Transition.
If you hadn't been to Hong Kong, go."
It is so much fun.
It's like, the rock, nature, building."
And everything is just so exaggerated.'
I love it because I hike, and so I'
can be in the mountains in seven minutes from my hotel,'
going straight up and in native vegetation.'
But then you can go buy beautiful things,'
you can go learn things in beautiful museums,'
great restaurants.
Just a really great city.
So, in looking at the tradition, it was really interesting'
how there's always this mist.
Remember foreground, meeting ground, far ground?'
Far ground is, what is the future, do we know the future.'
It's something about the eternal that is moving through,"
but at the same time, all the structures'
are quite build rectilinear over a very organic landscape.'
So this is the concept, and it's called Transparencies."
That you need that transparency, where'
you go through these veils.
And the veils are water, light, vegetation.'
And as you move through these veils,'
there's a bright light of the future."
Foreground, medium ground, farground.'
And moving through these veils means you're"
transitioning through time.
And so there was a five meter drop in the site'
and through that drop there was these bridges.'
And I wanted underneath the bridge'
to be like, party space, bright lights, fun,'
but then you move through the mist.'
And you step down through these veils.'
These are my sketches.
And these veils can be again, vegetation, light, or water.'
And this is one of my first sketches'
of, so there's these lines of water,"
lines of vegetation coming through, that you move through'
in a linear manner.
And this is another sketch of these lines of veils.'
And you're stepping down from up here, the five meters as it"
moves through.
This is the plan.
The high point is here, so just call this plus 5, 0, 0, 0.'
Really steep, flat, flat, somewhat steep.'
And bridge comes around here, all the way through.'
So, it's a reverse of what was happening"
in the Chinese gardens.
The bridge, by [? Hugh ?] [? Dutton ?] architecture,'
is all sort of Zaha Hadid fluid.
So I did all the streets.
So I sort of reversed the whole thing.'
He's like, really flipped out and said,"
you're undermining the bridge.
And I said, no, I'm highlighting it,"
so it's different from the landscape."
This is the bridge.
And the landscape has this is really ordered piece to it.'
And this shows, this section across,'
how you're under the bridge, lots of range"
so you're protected.
Then a waterfall comes down here and so you're stepping down."
You'll understand more as I go through."
This is a long section that shows, again, the highest'
point.
And as you move through, the veils.'
And this is another CDI that shows the high points up here.'
This is the long pool waterfall.
This is the oval pool.
There's a waterfall between them."
And then all these lines.
And there were waterfalls coming off the bridge that got'
[? VEA-ed ?] out.
This is the first 3D model built in the office.'
And there's something wrong with it."
I just couldn't figure out why it just didn't feel right."
So I did what I usually do.
I took it back into clay.
And said no, we're going to, I'm taking control here."
Why is it not working?
And basically, it was too tight.
And so, this is the long pool, the oval pool,'
and the water table.
The bridge comes over the top here'
and you're terracing down this way, or you move down this way."
Basically, you move all the way through this.'
You can come through here, or you can come down there,'
you can come down here and you can do that.'
Everything's handicap accessible to all different plateaus."
You see how rectilinear it is, which is'
sort of a big departure for me?
But it also was a way to pull those veils'
and just like, [? extrude ?] them down and give it'
the force it needed.
So then, how do you make those feel more sculptural?'
How do you start to work with them?'
One of the sketches, and then starting to work in 3-D,'
how do you move the water?
And what is the texture that moves the water?'
This is our texture moving through what'
is called the long pool.
And it's a water cascade coming down here."
The bridge is over here.
And this is looking again at the long pool coming down.'
The oval pool is over here.
You can see the bridge is over the top.'
Very tropical or very lush planting.'
And then back into 3D, refitting the 3D to match the model'
and then adjusting it.
And then from that, we go from our 3-D'
to cut poly Styrofoam to testing the water fullscale, one'
on one, to make sure it works.
And we're also doing all the lobbies"
and all the public floors.
Half of the office are architects.'
Neil Porter is an architect.
I did not do this.
This is Neil's work.
I would not have a clue what to do with a lobby.'
And he does just beautiful work, so.'
But he basically carried the landscape inside with veils,'
again, that represent all the veils of the concept.'
And I did the vegetation.
This is Washington D.C. By the way,'
this is under construction, the Hong Kong project.'
The buildings are demolished.
We're down into the first basement."
It is happening and it's happening really fast."
As they say in China, they don't wait around."
It's impressive.
I've been working on a project in Singapore for 10 years,"
and it still isn't in the ground."
I have another one that's coming out of the ground,"
but one isn't.
This is a competition that we won.'
And I want to show it because I think,'
again, it represents context.
Paying attention to context.
Trying to bring something contemporary into a very, very'
coveted landscape in the United States,'
which is the National Mall.
It's nervous working on the National Mall."
I cannot tell you how nervous it is.'
Everybody's eyes are on you.
And so, when we first looked at this, it was playing,'
you know--
I'm so glad I'd been working there for eight years"
before I even attempted this one.'
But this is the site.
It's right here.
It's called Union Square.
This is the Capitol.
This is the White House.
This is Pennsylvania Avenue, connects the two.'
This is Andrew Grant here, the general, looking across'
at his President, Lincoln, that created'
the Union after the Civil War.
I mean, the whole place, and then the Washington Monument.'
This is the Mall.
This is the Washington Monument grounds, oval, tidal basin,'
reflection pool, and the Constitution Gardens are here.'
One of the great things about Washington D.C.'
is the height control of the buildings.'
But it's very, very dense because of the height control."
And the thing about the Mall is, all of a sudden, everything's"
open as soon as you hit the Mall.'
And it's got this huge open space."
And so people that live there run in the morning,'
you play ball after work, I mean,'
it's a very lived in space.
But at the same time, it represents this nation.'
And this is the view of a water feature that is there today.'
This is the Grant Memorial, the Capitol.'
And this is your picture postcard'
that the Speaker of the House at the time'
absolutely wanted to maintain.
And this was a place of gathering'
of the presidential inaugurations,'
the local visitors, but it also was this huge, ugly 1960 basin'
that was just leaking gallons of water.'
And look at the size of this thing.'
If you came from the Mall, I mean'
you couldn't get to the Capitol.
Look at the size of the building.'
You had to walk all the way around here'
even to get an access.
And so people would do these dog paths trying'
to get around this thing.
And it was lower than here, so even as you're coming down"
the Mall, you didn't even see it til"
you were like, on top of it.
It is a Dan Kiley SOM, so I shouldn't criticize it"
quite so badly.
But it's probably more SOM than Dan Kiley."
But you can see how it really blocks'
this whole piece the was.
Another thing to know is that this is what was happening.'
These-- shoot, I keep messing up.'
Sorry.
These [? dog house ?] that keep being created.'
And you can see them here.
But it's really the accessibility."
And these dark spaces are trees and the open spaces'
are without trees.
Historically, you have L'Enfant Plan, 1791."
Really important how there was a canal through here.'
Basically, we're in a swamp.
And then there's this drainage of the swamp that"
was happening in the canal here in the capitol here'
and Pennsylvania.
Then, going through, the botanical gardens'
used to be this.
As you move through, we had the McMillan Plan, 1901,'
that created sort of like a Concord plaza'
with a fountain and a fountain here.'
McMillan plan was not built. Look'
at these dates, 1932 to 1936.
What happened in 1929?
Crash of the Market, no money.
Nobody had any money to build anything.'
So we went back to the simplest plan possible,'
just carrying them all through.
Reserve the botanical garden here and just'
fill it with trees.
OK?
So I think a lot of things happen for economic reasons.'
And it is a Frederick Law Olmsted Jr. plan.'
So we looked at that and said, OK, we've got a big thing here."
We've got a big thing here.
We've got a big thing here.
We don't put a big thing there.
Right?
We've got enough big things.
And so how do we just connect this whole thing through?'
We want to connect Lincoln to his general, right?'
And we want to make sure that's done in a really clear way."
What we worked on is that this was a connector piece.'
And so we're looking at this piece."
We have Union Square here, Union Station, which is the train'
station, Pennsylvania.
We really needed to connect in all different areas'
and not make it a separate area.
This is a sketch saying, you know,'
the Union was pulled apart during the Civil War.'
So it's like this puzzle of pieces"
that you're trying to pull back together."
And that actually is the plan of the garden.'
And you'll see all these lines when you see it in a moment."
This is where we are in our proposal that won.'
And I'll try to explain it to you"
because it's this entire piece.
Museum Row is on either side.
This is the Mall, the Capitol, and this is a tilted lawn'
that has events on it.
And what we proposed is a central water feature here.'
And it's basically a tri-part scheme."
Instead of trying to make this whole thing into one piece,'
we made this part a Union Square,'
this about the botanical garden, and this a botanical garden.'
So these two became living landscape museums'
that completed the museum alley at this Museum Row.'
The way this is composed is we're going back"
to Mannerism and Michelangelo.
So you see the two museum rows, then the centerpiece.'
And that is based on a [? perspectival. ?] Now,'
there's two reasons to do this.
One, this monument is slightly larger'
at this end then the end of the Mall here.'
And unfortunately, they didn't even put the statue on access"
with the Capitol.
So, you're trying to make something look symmetrical"
that is not symmetric.
So you've got to sort of fake things a bit."
But also, if you use Mannerism, if you take those lines'
and make them parallel, the Capitol'
is going to look farther away.
If you open up the end, the Capitol'
is going to come towards you and look more monumental.'
And also, to the visitor, it's going to look closer and easier"
to walk to.
[LAUGHTER]
No, it's important.
I mean, experiential.
What are you experiencing?
These people, they have two, four kids.'
It's hot.
They're sweaty.
They've been walking all day.
And they're supposed to get to the visitor's center."
And they got to climb up this hill.'
And so, you watch them.
I mean, they're dragging their bods across here,"
and then they're trying to go around this thing."
2nd Street doesn't go through.
There is a barrier over here.
Anyway, we're trying to make it much more accessible, much more"
part of it.
And at the same time, Boehner, you'
know, Speaker of the House at the time--'
actually wish he was still there--'
he wanted his view.
And so we really framed that view exactly the way'
they saw the view before.
And you have to understand, his office is like, right there.'
And it looks down at this.
And he didn't want his view changed."
Speaker of the House.
OK, so, it's like, you don't change his view."
Then you have this beautiful lawn'
that comes up to the Capitol, so to create that as a bowl,'
and frame it, I raised each side with terraces'
that made this one composition.
And then created these as being separate compositions.'
And you can see the size of the terraces.'
Now, this is a football field for scale.'
OK?
This is a big piece.
And we put in 2nd Avenue across.
You can see how much we increased'
from what was the circulation before to what'
is the circulation now.
You can see before, how it came here?'
Bump.
Go all the way around.
And that's what is in our proposal."
I still hope we're going to get it built one day."
Then the fountain.
It's made up of five panels.
And these are the terraces that I spoke about earlier that'
framed that space here.
And this is a view from those terraces'
across to the fountain.
And this is what I call the Beatles White'
Page, walking across water.
So that sort of float feeling?
And the way this is built is that the center fountain'
has these five panels.
All those panels can be emptied into a trough,'
and then recycled back, or each one of them'
can be turned on separately.
So you can have a event with all the fountains on, you know,'
first initiation.
Welcome to America.
This is who we are.
To, I want to do one event.
I want to do the inauguration.
I want to do a fair.
I wanted to have an event.
So you can turn off each panel separately.'
And none of them has water over four inches.'
Nobody can drown.
Everybody can walk across it.
Totally safe.
Or, you can put a stage here and have another event here'
with this as your backdrop.
That shows the botanical garden grounds.'
That shows what is called Emerging Voices.'
The Emerging Voices came from a program for youth,'
and so we've created it a little bit like [? Chemoix ?]"
[? sur ?] [? le ?] [? Way. ?] It's a series of pocket gardens"
that different youth display what they're doing today"
in their studies.
It could be science.
It could be anything.
And so there is a small museum that goes with it.'
Davis [? Bourdieu ?] [? Braund ?] was our partner'
in this.
And so, this becomes another program element.'
And for the botanical garden, it's"
all about native plants of the Washington D.C. area'
only, whereas the normal botanical'
has a much broader venue for the botanical, which'
is paleontology and everything else that goes with it.'
This is Pennsylvania Avenue.
It's a parking garage right now.
It's full of parking.
So we repaved it, made it pedestrian,'
and made it a space as an event space.'
And this is a view of Emerging Voices.'
So, different youth, different displays.'
And this shows what that small museum might be,'
what the big fountain, the new lawn, the terraces.'
And this is the storm water management of the piece.'
KPF Drew [? Genghis, ?] one of the best civil engineers'
I loved working with is really creative.'
We are zero water, zero energy.
And we recycle all our own sewage and waste.'
And you get to walk on water.
Or have a concert.
And you still have Lincoln.
I think there is a repeat in images here.'
I don't know what happened.
Sorry about this.
Maybe I gave her the wrong PowerPoint.'
I hope the other projects are in here.'
I like this quote.
"It\'s a danger to wait around for an idea to occur to you.'
You have to find the idea."
This is a very different kind of project.'
And it's the Venice Biennale.
And it was in 2008.
Aaron Betsky was the commissaire,'
and he called me up like, way too late.'
Like, April for August, right?
Because the original commissaire died,'
he got appointed too late.
You know, it was a mess.
And he said, come and do a paradise garden.'
And I said, yeah, sure, OK.
Then I started looking around and said well,'
where am I going to do a paradise garden?'
And he said, well, why don't you do"
in the garden of the Chinese pavilion?'
Well, the Chinese didn't want me to do something"
in their pavilion.
And so I got on Google Earth.
And I said, hey, there's this piece of land here."
And so, it was this whole area here.'
And the Chinese pavilion is here.'
The Italian pavilion is here.
The Corderie is here.
This is all water.
Sorry, it's just a line drawing.
We actually took up way more than we should have.'
I had never done the Biennale.
I didn't realize I should have done"
a really small little thing.
Instead, I did like, three acres,'
and we had to finance it all ourselves.'
So this is the site when we arrived.'
It's this beautiful tower.
And then we find this place.
And it's covered in bramble.
And the trees are just like, dying from ivy.'
And it was a real challenge.
The concept about paradise was that--'
am I going really over time here?'
OK.
I'll finish just this one, then I'll stop."
I can't tell you how to get to paradise, right?"
But what I can say is--
my idea on this was take stock in what you remember.'
OK, so what have you lost?
It's really important to understand what you've lost."
And then, what nourishes you?
What gives you joy?
And then take those two things together and sit down'
and think about your life and enlightenment.'
What is going to be paradise for you?'
And so, doing that created a series of sketches, where'
we first had the storeroom, where it was images'
of all the different species of plants we'
have lost due to human pollution.'
And then, they carve through the bramble, these pieces,'
to get to nourishment, which was this big vegetable garden.'
And then you go to enlightenment,'
a land sculpture where you lay down'
and you think about your future.
This is the site.
There was a church here.
This was the original vegetable garden.'
We actually laid down protection over archeology'
and added soil on top so we never touched the archeology.'
This is the storeroom here, where it's remembrance."
And this is the nourishment, the vegetable garden.'
And this is enlightenment.
This is the images of the storeroom.'
And Smithsonian help us with all the list.'
And [? Ghikelani, ?] the lighting company,'
did all the lighting for free.
And I have to say, we raised all the money with American funds'
from the United States.
We raised $250,000.
These are the carved pathways through, and then'
this wonderful man, who created the vegetable garden,'
because I had literal charts.
You germinate the seed here, it takes'
this long, because everything had to bloom on August 15,'
right?
And so, no vegetable garden blooms.'
[INAUDIBLE] So I came to this guy who says--'
you know, 75-year-old Italian plants man with my chart--'
anyway, don't worry, dear, it'll be fine."
And he was absolutely right.
It was absolutely beautiful.
I did take inspiration from Louise Bourgeois.'
At the end of her life, she was making sculpture out of fabric'
and sewing fabric.
So, I got back out my sewing machine, because fashion,'
and I hand-did the face that is a woman scarecrow with 501'
jeans, a Pendleton jacket, and a redhead wick,'
which was stolen within four days.'
But it was this wonderful vegetable garden.'
People came.
They could eat things.
They could rest on benches.
There was roses.
It was, after the Mediterranean garden,'
where-- everything in your house goes into the vegetable garden.'
So it's your flowers, your herbs, and your food."
Where the English put the kitchen garden, the flower'
garden, cut garden, separately.
The Italians didn't.
The French, they mix it all together.'
And we had baskets of food that people would come in and eat.'
It was lovely.
It was absolutely lovely.
And then, enlightenment.
You know how, in all the religious things, where'
you're going up to heaven, there's"
all these fabric going up.
And you're going up to heaven, so I wanted"
fabric flying in the air.
And Neil and I talked about the fabric flying in the air.'
And so, we flew fabric in the air.'
First we had to create land movement of enlightenment.'
This is my clay model.
And the idea is to create a place of the prince,'
so you can lay down there and nobody can see you.'
And you can look at the fabric going up to enlightenment,'
and you can imagine your paradise and your future.'
And then you've got to get up and go do something about it."
So these are the bottles of how you'
walk into that space and some other photographs of it.'
And then it started to be built. All the fabric,'
they were 30 meters long by 15 meters wide.'
There are two of them.
Ripstop, nylon.
And I did all the models in reduced, miniature form'
in my studio shop, with fans blowing at them'
and slips in them and things.
And then we just took a chance and, you know, they worked.'
But they're helium balloons that held him up."
And we had these guys from England come down'
and do all the balloon stuff.
You can see the land move and there's"
the place of the prince where you get to hide.'
And then you fly the plans.
And there they go [MAKING NOISES]'
because there are only two.
There are not three, right?
So the wind will push the balloons up and down.'
And so they just keep moving.
And at night, they're absolutely fantastic."
And Aaron Betsky has his 50th birthday party there.'
They were really amazing.
And I think that's my last slide."
We'll find out.
Yep.
[APPLAUSE]
Do you have enough energy for some questions?'
Yeah, I can always answer some questions.'
Thank you, Kathryn.
Wonderful talk.
Some people have to file out, but I know there will be--'
Sorry I went on too long.
That's OK.
While you're preparing your questions, I have one for you."
Yeah.
I'd love if you would say something"
about the role of making drawings by hand'
and making models by hand.
Because we seem to be losing it, but you haven't lost it at all."
Well, I think that when you actually draw or model'
with your hands to scale, and you had crit reviews today,'
heard me say, you've got to do it by hand."
There's something about drawing that section"
by hand, your pencil putting a person in there.'
And all of a sudden, you are inside that drawing.'
There's no other way to be inside a drawing."
You can't be inside a 3D computer screen that is 2D."
I mean, you're falsifying right away,"
because you're looking at a 2D image of the 3D thing."
Where, when you're actually drawing it,"
you are actually in the reality.
And for myself, on the models, I have little people.'
I've got my head down.
You can't lie in a model.
If you have forgotten to put that point,'
it goes on to infinity and you have'
that open in your model on the computer,'
and there's a hole into the end of the world there?"
You know, you can't do that when you're on a physical model."
That hole is saying, fill me up.
You forgot me.
There's something over here.
You haven't figured it out.
So for me, it's really important."
But, I am old school.
Section, section, section.
It is the best to know what is the scale of what you're doing."
It's clear that it's generative.
And then you're talking about it being descriptive."
You draw the section and understand scale.'
But, it's also recuperative.
The Hong Kong example is one where'
you were critical about what you saw in the 3D and went back'
and did it by hand to recalibrate.'
Questions?
There's another mic.
I have one.
Can you wait for the mic?
Kathryn, you work with infrastructure.'
And you have big ideas.
And conceptual ideas.
But you also care about plants.
And you know your plants.
Can you talk about how you came to know plants or appreciate'
them?
It's not really fair.
I've worked with [? Meg, ?] and so she's just"
been like flabbergast--
I'm just buried with plants for me, which was great fun."
When I first started out, I didn't plant."
I only did land movement.
And I put a few trees, because I didn't know what I was doing."
I mean, plants are really complicated.'
And so, for years, I would read a half an hour every morning.'
And I would choose subjects.
Let's do viburnums.
OK.
You know, I'd do family of viburnums for like, two months."
And then I'd do a project with viburnums."
And then I would go through and say, OK, let's do conifers."
And so, it was really just a methodical'
going through years and years of study.'
And then one day, I got my own garden and planted it.'
You know, I only lost 10%.
And I thought, you know, I did learn something.'
You don't have to have a garden.
You can actually learn by book learning, walking scene, going'
to nurseries, experiencing.
It is better if you have a little place to experiment with'
and fail.
And then, the other thing is learn your families.'
I think that's someone that Dan Hinkley taught"
me, who is a really wonderful plant expert and one of my best'
friends.
Having plant experts nuts helps because they keep'
talking to you all the time.
Both my parents are master gardeners, so that does help.'
They just like, plant bombarded me.'
My dad was trees and shrubs, my mother'
was perennials and roses.
And she also was a native plant expert.'
She could take you into the forest'
and tell you absolutely everything you could eat.'
And I've spent my life going through the mountains with her."
So I think there's a lot of things that happened to me."
And when I first started, I was doing'
much more sculptural landscape.
And now, I just have fallen in love more and more with plants.'
And I can't go to a nursery without spending way too"
much money.
They're wonderful.
They're wonderful friends.
And they change all the time.
It's a really steep room, isn't it?"
It is.
I wanted to ask about a lot of the projects.'
And you begin with talking about being focused'
on the experience, the what it feels'
like to be in a landscape.
And I'm wondering how you stay grounded"
in that when you do the big projects, the big scale stuff.'
I think it's a really good question,"
because on the really big projects,'
there's a lot of pressures happening"
from a lot of different angles.
You saw in the Hong Kong piece, I'
put down in the beginning what I want it to feel like.'
I want it to be immersive.
I wanted veils.
I wanted these colors, these sounds.'
And I try to hold into that.
The National Museum of African-American History'
and Culture, the pavilion in a park, trying to hold that.'
I think that if your concept is clear enough, and fits,'
you can hold onto it.
And it's going to get pushed around"
on the really big project.
There's all sorts of constraints."
I can't even go into where they all come from."
But I think you can.
It's obviously on a smaller project"
much easier to do, especially one without an architect.'
Well, it's true, because you're not"
dealing with another person who wants to design everything'
in the world also.
Right?
I've heard of that.
Let's have one more question.
There's a woman right there.
These are so annoying.
You've got to figure this thing out."
I was wondering if you could speak'
for a minute about the practice side of your life.'
I loved hearing about your influences, and creativity,'
but you were brave enough to run two firms.'
And if you could talk a little bit about how you work those,'
what to me are kind of competing sides of the business'
side and creative side.
First off, I do not run two firms.'
We're nine partners.
And the secret is nine partners.
And nine very talented partners.
As you know, I mean, I don't know"
how I got such great partners, but I have great partners.'
And there's sort of a saying we have."
It's, we talk until we agree.
And I think it's really important, that communication"
and that patience.
And that also is that design matters.'
And design is the root of our identity and our culture.'
And our ethics are all the same also.'
So, honesty, really being ethical,'
and being design driven.
That holds this group together.
I ran my own office of 16 people without any problem.'
And once you start having other people help you,'
it has all those dimensions.
And the other thing is, your partner should never'
be like you.
You should only be the person that can do what you do.'
And they should be only the person that do what they do.'
And so that diversity is what makes it a really interesting'
partnership.
But then the firms are interesting'
because their cultural in that way, that everybody'
has like that Georgia O'Keefe.
The first statement is, make your unknown known.'
I think that's part of the secret to it."
That's beautiful.
Thank you all for being here.
Kathryn, it's fantastic having you here."
You're going to take me to dinner?"
I am.
OK.
[APPLAUSE]
