Good evening.
It's great to see so many of you here tonight."
I want to once again welcome all the DDes,'
MDes, MDE admitted students who are here with us tonight'
to this talk, of course as well as'
all of our current students, faculty, and friends.'
It's been a really busy day today."
I think the energy around the building'
has been very palpable, and I hope that all of you'
have had a really great day.
I just want to start by mentioning'
a couple of forthcoming events on Monday of next week'
at the same time here in Piper we have the British architect'
Amanda Levete--
who has recently won the Stirling Prize--'
will give a talk.
And then that will be followed the next evening, on April 10,'
again at 6:30--
we have the annual John T. Dunlop lecture,'
which this year is going to be delivered'
by Raphael Bostic, who is the president and CEO of Federal'
Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
And Raphael will be discussing the future of fair housing.'
Which, this year marks the 50th anniversary'
of the passage of Fair Housing Act.'
It's really wonderful to be able to welcome Jeanne Gang to give"
tonight's lecture.
As most of you know, Jeanne is a really incredible architect'
currently practicing in Chicago and New York'
where her offices are, and of course'
doing projects in many other locations.'
She is a MacArthur fellow, which is also'
something very, very, very, very rare,'
and is the founding principle of Studio Gang, an architecture'
and urban design practice.
She is also a member of the American Academy'
of Arts and Sciences and was named as [speaking french]'
[chuckles]
Which is really wonderful.
[laughter]
I was wondering whether I should say that'
or not, but since she has the title you have'
to persevere with my agony.
Jeanne is internationally renowned for her design process'
that foregrounds the relationship'
between individuals, communities,'
and the environment.
She has an incredibly diverse body of work'
at a multiplicity of scales.
And you've seen this work represented"
through such examples as the Aqua Tower,'
the Arcus Center for Social Justice Leadership,'
and the Writer's Theater.
She's currently designing major projects"
throughout the Americas and Europe,'
including the Gilder Center for Science Education'
and Innovation at the American Museum of Natural History'
in New York, Unified Campus for California College of Arts'
in San Francisco, and the new United States'
Embassy in Brasilia, in Brazil.
With each one of these projects there is enormous effort,'
I think, in her practice to combine research investigations'
with the design of the projects.
And there's really a great deal of focus"
on the way in which materials are used'
and the sources of those materials.'
So there is actually a great deal of connection'
to the investigation of the materials and techniques'
of construction, as well as the social capacities'
and capabilities and contributions of her projects.'
She is a recipient of the 2013 National Design'
Award, which is given by the Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian'
Design Museum.
Jeanne was also named a 2016 Architect of the Year'
by the Architectural Review.
In 2017 she was honored with the Louis Kahn Memorial Award'
and made an honorary fellow of the Royal Architectural'
institute of Canada.
Widely published and acclaimed, her work'
has been exhibited at the Venice Architecture Biennale,'
and it will be again this coming summer at the Chicago'
Architecture Biennale--
or biennial-- Museum of Modern Art'
and the Art Institute of Chicago.'
She's also published a number of books on her practice"
and on ideas related to her practice.'
We're very proud of the fact that she"
is a graduate of this school, and was recently'
appointed professor in practice here at the GSD.'
Would you please join me in welcoming Jeanne Gang?'
[applause]
Thank you so much for that nice introduction.'
I also want to say hi to and recognize'
Claire Cahan and Johanna Faust who are here from my office'
today, and also to the students from our studio for the option'
studio after the storm.
See you guys.
And so today I wanted to talk about the practice,'
about the research aspects of the practice,'
and about thinking about design through practicing'
and research.
A little bit about the practice is'
that we started out in Chicago and have grown that practice'
to about 85 people there.
But there's a strong culture within the office that"
is really based on collaborating and working'
with our hands and our minds and working together.'
So as we grew and kind of spread out--'
we actually have an office in San Francisco'
now, a small one, and New York and Chicago.'
We started to-- we grew our practice'
to collaborate across the different cities.'
So it's not isolated in each one."
And we still do a lot together, even'
though we're on different-- the three separate coasts."
And one of the things that we like to do'
is to pick up on issues that are pertinent of our time,'
and things that are interesting to us,'
and sometimes make a project that doesn't really"
have a client.
And so this was one of those projects.'
It ended in a book, but there's some research work"
from the GSD students in it as well.'
This book is called Reverse Effect, which was really'
about-- it was time to come out with some policy'
discussions that were going on in Chicago about whether'
or not to clean wastewater before it was entered back'
into the river system.
There is a lot of different problems with the Chicago River'
system, and so our work in the book'
was to try to explain those, because it's"
somewhat complicated.
There's very poor water quality.
There's a lot of flooded basements because"
of the hydrology system.
There's the threat of invasive carp coming up the Mississippi"
River, threatening to enter into the Great Lakes.'
And then there's a lot of post-industrial fabric"
along the river, which is of great potential.'
About 100 years ago these canals were built.'
And this is what reversing the Chicago River refers to.'
The red lines are canals that basically'
took the water from emptying from the lake into the rivers,'
and did the reverse.
Made the-- [chuckles] The rivers were going into the lake,'
and now the lake goes into the rivers'
and ultimately across this sub-continental divide, joining'
up with the Des Plaines River and ultimately'
the Mississippi River, ending up in the Gulf of Mexico.'
And that was in order to preserve the drinking'
water that was getting polluted from all of these dumping'
into the rivers.
That solution, of course, 100 years ago was a fine solution.'
But today we know that that's just"
delaying the pollution to downstream'
and messing up someone else's water system."
So we wanted to explain that part'
and to also ask people how they were using the river today.'
So a real integral part of our practice'
has become working with community members, people,'
individuals, the public, and really speaking with them'
and finding out their ideas and attitudes,'
more like an industrial designer would'
do for a problem than typically an architect.'
But I think it should change.
I think architects and urban designers and landscape'
architects should all be very well-connected'
to the communities that they're designing in."
But the most interesting thing that came out of the book'
was kind of a design series of steps'
of how to undo this big problem of the reversed river'
and ultimately clean the water and put it back into the lake.'
About two billion gallons are taken out every day just'
to dilute the sewage that ends up getting flushed downstream.'
Step number one of this diagram was really about giving people'
access to the riverfront, and that the city should'
take steps to make it possible.
Given the fact that most of this industrial fabric was private,'
it was very hard for people to access that riverfront.'
And so this was one of the recommendations in the book.'
The interesting thing about this book--'
like I said, it was kind of aimed at the public,'
but it had a lot of interesting research inside--'
but it was picked up by the mayor of Chicago'
before he was mayor, and the ended up really'
taking on the river as a project.'
And since he has been the mayor he's"
also done a number of projects, the Riverwalk downtown'
and a number of boathouses, of which we'
designed a couple of them.
So this boathouse really is the idea that we were going for,'
which was to give people access to the river,'
give them a program, give a piece of architecture that'
would make it exciting to go to the river.'
And we designed two of these very minimal cost,'
but two projects that really create'
an access point and a place for youth'
to engage with this water.
Even though it's polluted, and if you fell in you"
would probably want to take a bath afterwards.'
But the river would not have these stewards'
unless people could care about it and go there.'
So the building-- we really wanted'
to harness some of the energy of rowing.'
We looked at these Muybridge photographs of rowers moving,'
and the movement of these oars.
And then tried to translate that into a roof'
form with a v-shape roof and an m-shape roof of very'
simple trusses that that could somehow'
let light in from the south and help our sustainability'
performance for the building.
Here it is under construction.
And you can see it's very simple materials, very simple wood"
studs and metal studs.
Everything is straight, but when they come together'
it creates kind of a vaulted, warped roof surface.'
And they have, like, a rowing tank'
for the winter, inside rowing.
But for me, seeing this-- it's just"
super-exciting to see people using the river, in this case,'
for a regatta and kind of reengaging it in a way that'
hadn't been done before.
This is a building made with slate.'
They asked us to do a masonry building, but we said--'
slate is kind of masonry.
But we needed something that could'
wrap all the surfaces that were so complex once you have'
this warped roof structure.
In the second floor of the field house--'
this is a Vierendeel truss that you kind of-- you're"
inhabiting the attic.
The programs they have there though are really great.'
They have rowing, teaching rowing to veterans,'
they have after-school rowing programs.'
A lot of the space is really meant to support the community'
and support kids' after-school learning, support"
community gatherings.
This one is being used for yoga now in the mornings, and just'
a lot of different activities.
So it ends up being more than a boathouse.'
This is the second one that we just finished.'
And so this whole idea of creating a project out'
of a book or an idea is something'
that's really interesting.
It's a way for an architect, I think,"
to take control of your own destiny.'
We call it "actionable idealism" because we are idealistic'
and we want to see progress on our projects.'
And another one that's a little bit similar"
where we expanded the brief from what was given'
is the Nature Board Walk at Lincoln Park Zoo.'
And again-- so you can see that there'
is a real strong attention to environment and care'
about environment in both of these projects.'
This was on a pond.
It was kind of a 19th-century version of a pond that'
was about three feet deep.
Had this historic building on it,'
the idea that you would be reflecting on nature'
and looking at it but not really engaging with it.'
And this place had kind of rundown over the years,'
so the zoo wanted us to build a pavilion there'
that would be really attractive and kind of reflect'
on their mission.
What we said was, it's not just about the pavilion."
It really is the entire pond.
We have to look at it as an ecosystem'
and improve it as a place.
And so working together with landscape architects'
and hydrologists, we found that one of the biggest problems'
was just the water quality.
So the biggest effort on this project'
was really turning it into a storm water retention system'
and making it a lot deeper so that fish could winter over'
in this pond and it could support a much cleaner--'
more oxygen in the water.
This is a view.
You can see that this site is really right in the city, right'
along a lake front.
And over the years that it's been finished,"
we see increased biodiversity, a lot more people using'
the site-- these are kind of the early years--'
and a really more mature, biodiverse landscape coming'
online.
And what's really cool about this project is,"
because this place is so attractive to insects, animals,'
birds, a lot of times they're coming there just"
to get this habitat.
Like, it's almost like the zoo without cages,"
where animals are around volunteering'
to show themselves off.
And what I like about that is that they even'
started an institute at the zoo that is now'
studying urban wildlife and monitoring bats and recording'
sounds.
And it's become really a space of science"
as well as a place for kids to learn about the pond life.'
You can see, going back-- you know,'
we're always looking for data.
How is our work performing?
This one, the number of bird species, has increased.'
183.
That's from eBird.
You have all these different kinds of turtles'
there, something like 400 nesting pair'
of black-crowned night herons.
I mean, then you start to get into--'
you know, you can actually have wildlife right in the city.'
And what are the conflicts?
I think it's really an interesting question."
We've seen skunk recorded there, coyotes."
There's, like, 2,000 coyotes populating the city of Chicago."
They're actually a very good urban animal--"
mammal.
And so this architecture kind of helps support that science.'
But then we did design a pavilion,'
and actually it took quite a while to design and not'
very long to build.
It was all done with these pre-fabricated lamellas.'
Their material is bent in two directions,'
so it's like a material of glue-laminated"
but very, very small pieces with fiberglass pods'
that allow the light to be very even inside.'
And we just thought of it as a flexible space.'
It was supposed to be for education, for a class.'
But it has just been adopted like crazy.'
So we see dance groups coming there, yoga again.'
A lot of our projects attract yoga for some reason.'
[laughter]
But at this time we really were thinking--'
we started noticing that people are getting, like, married'
there and--
[laughter]
It's, like, an architecture that makes people kiss each other"
and be together.
[chuckles]
And so we thought that, you know,'
that is really probably the best thing that architecture can do.'
Because of our time right now-- which is so polarized--'
we need to make spaces where people can mix and intermingle.'
One of the things that we never planned for but was'
so exciting to see was the site used for Diner en Blanc, which'
is an impromptu dinner that they used the entire boardwalk for.'
So I guess what we learned from these projects,'
doing these projects is that if you're"
trying to support the environment'
through your projects it really has to be about people,'
supporting people's interactions first."
And if we can't get people to agree on what to do,"
it won't work.
So another part of our practice, in addition'
to kind of these self-initiated projects that'
have to do with writing and issues of urbanism,'
we've been really interested in materials and construction"
as well.
An early project that we did was an installation in the National'
Building Museum.
And it was called "The Marble Curtain."'
And then, like 10 years later we were'
asked to do the summer installation inside this Grand'
Hall at the Building Museum.
If you've never been there, it's a gigantic space,"
enormous space.
One of the qualities of it is that you can't hear someone"
talking even if they're, like, five feet away from you."
It's so big and cavernous.
So our idea here was really to create'
these domes inside that could be acoustically programmed.'
The other installations that had been here before'
were all on the ground plane.
They were like a maze, and a beach,'
and some things like that.
And we really wanted to do an architectural construction that'
is a structure and also have this acoustic benefit.'
And so we proposed these hive structures which, at 50 feet,'
would be the highest installation ever done inside'
of it.
And we would have to do it without scaffolding, and in two'
weeks' time installation.
And so it was a real challenge to design.'
It really just started with very small-scale models, materials'
that we had around the office.
And we very gradually scaled up.
We needed a connection that could be done really quickly.'
So we were looking at these slotted connections'
for the tubes.
This is still not--
you know, this is a small scale and looking'
at how we could get a wall that would be structural'
using the curvature.
And because it is a structure, it has to be analyzed'
and it has to stand up and be over people's heads."
So a significant part of it is structural engineering'
and testing.
There is no data available on paper tubes,'
to be crushed in this way that they'
had to withstand because they had to basically crush'
at 3,700 pounds.
We found, though-- this was at Columbia Univeristy'
where they tested it.
It got up to 17,000 pounds.
So it was about 4.6 times stronger than was expected.'
And again, just keeping--
the material is paper, so it's a nice recyclable material."
The silver part is just the last piece of paper on the outside,'
and the pink part is the first piece of paper on the inside.'
So these mockups really helped us'
to work through details and construction'
that then went into the major dome spaces.'
And it was just amazing to see this thing come together.'
It wasn't perfect in terms of how easily it went together."
Of course it became used for yoga again.'
[laughter]
I mean, this one was really just a mecca for yoga.'
I mean, you wouldn't believe it.
[continued laughter]
But inside there were also lots of really rowdy parties.'
Like they had dance parties and music, and lectures,'
and all different things that could take advantage'
of the acoustics of the space.
Which is a lot like--
it worked kind of like if you were in a clearing in a forest,'
where you have cylindrical trees around you.'
And let's say a clearing-- you would"
get this sound bouncing around.
It really worked quite well.
So we've been devoting part of our practice"
to these kind of installations.
One benefit is, they get built quickly.'
So people in the office get to work'
on something that's done, whereas some projects"
we have take 10 years to build.
So we've been-- and they're also these things that"
inspire people to be together.
And we really like that part.
There's tall buildings as well.
Now, how do you make tall buildings more social?'
And there are more and more projects'
that we are getting, as the cities become'
more vertical, that are tall.
And so we like the idea of increasing the density'
and reducing carbon with a smaller footprint in the city.'
We don't like the idea of people not connecting"
in tall buildings.
Because a lot of times they're very off-putting."
So one of the first projects we did'
was the Aqua Tower, which has these balconies.'
And the whole idea of the balconies'
was to create a kind of topography'
on the outside of the building that would--'
like hills and valleys that would allow people'
on the building to see the landscape around'
and to see landmarks, but also to see each other.'
The nice side-benefit is, they really'
help to ameliorate the wind.
This is a shot from the wind-tunnel.'
And with the research on tall buildings--'
you know, we started it out-- it's"
just a requirement to do wind-tunnel testing so that you'
can see the loads on the building'
and design the building structure.'
But it's also about the social space around the building, too,"
and making that comfortable.
But now, you know, it's getting more advanced"
and we're using it more as a design tool."
With this building it was really about seeing the neighbors'
and being part of the city and being'
part of the building at the same time.'
And we did hear that people are getting together'
in the building.
They're starting to meet and it's a very social building."
And there's lots of groups that are"
formed in that building that are unlike a lot'
of other tall buildings.
But the balcony seems to be a place where you'
can make this social happen.
This is another building called "City Hyde Park"'
where we tried to improve the performance of the balconies'
here.
And if you can see, the model over here on the right--'
each balcony is its own stem.
And the gravity loads from that stem come all the way down'
to the ground.
And then it can just touch back lightly'
to the rest of the building.
And that lets us do the thermal break, which'
we couldn't get into at Aqua.
So this is an image of the thermal break between where'
the balcony on the left and the inside space on the right.'
And we've actually installed in this building monitoring"
equipment.
So some of the units don't have a thermal break"
and other ones do, and we're testing."
Because we always hear that this is the most important thing'
in buildings.
And frankly, I am starting to doubt it because of the data'
that we're getting back.
So we're going to publish something on that"
in the tall buildings research.
But these balconies really have a very nice'
three-dimensional quality, and allow people'
to step outside and be almost like a threshold zone'
where it's like a porch or something where"
it's not thought of as a totally private space on the balcony."
You can't see into other people's units,"
but you can see other people on their balconies in a major way.'
I mean, the thing is, like--
I mean, there's so many interesting spaces on this."
And we actually-- this side of the building,'
which faces south--
the balcony stems also provide shading.'
And the front side of the building that looks north'
has the skyline.
Everyone thought that the north part would rent rent out first.'
This is a rental building.
But the south part did.
And it was just--
No.
I always thought it would be like, OK, introverts'
on the north, social people on the south.'
[laughing]
But everybody wanted to be on the south, which'
was very interesting.
So I think this balcony is an interesting piece of this,'
as kind of a research that's very"
particular to residential high-rise'
that we're continuing with.
It's also about materials and construction."
But I think one of the tools that we learned'
from these taller buildings is really'
how to work with that wind tunnel as a design tool.'
So I wanted to show a competition that we recently'
did.
And I think it's safe to say that competitions"
are design research, especially when you don't win."
It goes into the research pile.
[laughter]
But this one we got second place,'
and it was very, very close.
But this is for a really interesting problem'
that is now coming up a lot more,'
which is to re-clad and redefine tall buildings that are really'
coming to the kind of year that their skin is failing.'
A lot of them have asbestos.
Tour Montparnasse was-- it's about 210 meters,"
and it was built--
it was finished in, I think it was in '73,"
and it was designed by a consortium of three architects'
and an American firm as well.
Three French architects and an American firm.'
And it was an urban renewal project,'
and it's really the only thing of its scale around there."
This is just a little map that shows'
you the footprint of the building,'
the train station, and then this incredibly windy, uncomfortable'
plaza that is in front of it.
So on this competition we thought'
our approach would be, how could we'
change the building in its second life'
to reduce the discomfort on the plaza.'
So that was kind of the starting point.'
Like, it turns out that this shape,'
which is a really weird shape--
it shoots the air straight down.
It\'s kind of referred to as a "downwash"'
in the wind-tunnel business.
But it shoots the wind right down to the plaza.'
And I have experienced.
It is very, very uncomfortable there.'
But the whole idea of the wind tunnel'
owes a lot to the French engineering--'
an engineer, Etienne-Jules Marey,'
who really did some of the first wind tunnel studies.'
I happened to see a show of his--'
maybe it was 10 or 15 years ago--'
and stumbled upon these incredible models that'
were wind tunnel models using smoke to reveal'
the vortices and so on.
So one of the issues about tall buildings'
is, you use fluid dynamics to understand'
how to size the structure, but also what's"
happening to the environment around the building.'
So for Tour Montparnasse-- we see that red part right there--'
that was that wash going down.
And so our idea was to--
at the same time of improving this floor plate'
to make it bigger, but also mix the use of the building--'
but try to work on the wind performance.'
I've really been interested in nature and a lot of the things"
that you find out about engineering through nature.'
And one of the things that's really pretty recent"
is that these bumps on the flippers of humpback whales--'
they actually have a purpose, which'
is to reduce the vortex shedding and to make'
them more fluid dynamic.
So there's this idea of bumpiness"
that's coming into-- which wasn't there."
In buildings we're way far behind,"
let's say, airplane design and other industrial designs."
But so the idea to fill out the floorplan,'
and then to create these bumpiness which'
would reduce the loads on the building,'
reduce the amount of steel that the building has,'
and reduce a vortex shedding and the downwash.'
So we actually were testing a lot of these things'
before we had the project.
We were doing it in the wind-tunnel,'
this one up in Canada.
And you can see right here, putting one'
of the models on this plate.
And then that goes up into the chamber.'
So the picture on the right is a chamber'
with a model of Paris around it.
I also thought that this-- thinking about Marey'
again-- it's these stopgap images, a lot like what we were"
looking at in the boathouse.
That's fascinating.
And so our concept really started'
with this idea of structure.
Like, we had to have more structure'
to hold up a brand-new facade that's"
much heavier than the one that was there.'
We needed new glass.
And why not have like 1,000 belvederes on the building'
where everybody has a corner?
And then we get this bumpiness and we get this new skin that'
would really perform as well.
And so we ended up designing this double skin--'
a thin, double-skinned facade with an internal blind.'
And this would be a reflective material.'
And the cool thing about it is, if they're"
automated you would get this response'
to the sun and the overheating, and it would actually'
become a reflective building, but in a way'
that would be moving and alive.
And I think that's one of the things most missing"
on the Tour Montparnasse right now.'
It just doesn't feel very alive.
And we found, by doing this-- this is a simulation that--'
you know, you could have one shade down,'
and the other open so you still maintain the views because'
of these bumps.
So we had a better shading performance, and really'
a kind of very nice new life for the building'
with a kind of a human scale to it that'
relates more to the context.
And so it would have this kind of-- if you look'
at the different--
as it's changing, responding to the light,"
it would have these different moving quality to it.'
The social spaces like the lobby--'
these are the new columns coming down and spreading out'
away from the foundation.
Very technically challenging project.'
Lots of new uses in the ground level,'
with a bigger footprint at the ground.'
Breaking up the wind down there with wider spaces, terraces.'
Really starting to make more connections to the program,'
inside and out, with some co-worked space and connection'
to the observatory.
So all of the uses were supporting this.'
And also at the top an idea about this structure, this'
[inaudible] that would go up and out and capture the glass.'
So we would have an enclosed roof garden as opposed'
to the open air one they have currently.'
But it also has decks outside.
So it was really thinking about the building'
in a totally different way for us,'
because we didn't have a client in a certain way."
It was a competition, and we were free to experiment'
with all these things.
I'm just going bring it back down in scale now"
to a more manageable scale.
The Arcus Center for Social Justice Leadership.'
I really like this project because it is based on--'
they wanted us to help break down'
these boundaries between people that'
are coming together to learn how to be'
leaders in social justice.
And it's on a small campus in--
Kalamazoo College.
Small campus in Michigan dominated by this kind of--'
to me it's colonial.
I know there's history professors in here about"
colonial architecture.
And I was just thinking, we can't"
match this colonial architecture with the Social Justice Center.'
That would be really bad.
[laughter]
So we had a good excuse to not do a traditional building.'
Not that we would anyway.
But what is a Social Justice Center?'
We didn't know.
And we started to look at the spaces of social justice.'
Where does it happen?
It happens in the streets.
You know?
it's in the public spaces.
There isn't really a typology for a social justice center."
So we looked there.
Then we thought about Dr. King and, like,'
where did the plan these marches.'
And a lot of times it was, you know, around a kitchen table'
or in the basement of a church, in very more small spaces.'
And we looked at places around the world'
where meeting houses, community meeting houses a lot of times'
are focused inward so people can face each other.'
I think it's really important when"
you want to have a conversation to face someone.'
So it sounds simple.
The one on the upper left is in Mali, and that one even'
has a low roof so people stay seated and face each other when'
the elders meet.
And it keeps people from standing up and taking'
over the meeting.
We did put this meeting space right in the middle'
with a hearth, which is not that easy in an academic building'
to have an open fireplace and a kitchen as well.'
Because food was another one of those things'
that breaks down these barriers between people.'
So it can be used-- this building is flexible.'
It's open.
It has meeting spaces within it, but it'
can be used for small or large-scale meetings'
and conferences.
It has some study spaces and some offices in it.'
And it has seminar rooms--
the small one and a larger one that looks out onto this grove.'
So it started from the inside out.'
But from the outside it really had'
to address these three different contexts.'
One was the grove.
The other one was the campus.
And finally, just this neighborhood,'
which is across the street, of residential houses.'
So as we were developing this concept,'
we wanted to also make it maybe use a wood structure or wood'
cladding on the building to connect it to the grove.'
And we found the white cedar is really good from Michigan.'
It's rot-resistant and it's insect-resistant."
And we also stumbled upon this amazing barn'
when we were driving up and back to Michigan,'
and it was over 100 years old.
And it had this wood masonry, which I had never seen before.'
And we were so intrigued with this we thought,'
what if we could bring this technique back?'
You know, that would be amazing.
So we looked all around to find if anyone'
knew how to do wood masonry, and we discovered this couple that'
had been going around and teaching people how to do it,'
mostly for, like, a personal sauna'
or something in the backyard.
And we asked them to come to our office'
and we asked them to teach us how to do it'
and to teach our masons how to do it as well.'
And it turns out, it's such a great technique"
because you're really absorbing all this carbon in the tree's"
life, the tree's releasing oxygen,"
but you're not over-processing this wood."
It's just drying out.
And you're using all the wood, all the different sizes"
of the tree.
So we just brought some 21st-century techniques here,'
like the pre-sorting so the masons don't"
have to think about it.
Other things-- the insulation quality is very high.'
And we also did a lot of testing on the aesthetics of it,'
because it can look pretty crude.'
But we were able to make this incredible wall that's"
so textured and connected to the idea of masonry,'
but also something new.
So these three curved walls also do'
something in that they put the wood into compression'
in the arc.
So that's also a good thing for this type of building."
We imagined it weathering differently'
on the different sides, which it has.'
This is one of the--
we tried this window, which is this kind of eyebrow window'
sideways, and it's got amazing weathering on it."
But really a long, very enduring technique'
that expresses this idea of community inside and out.'
I mean, the fact that you kind of can do it by yourself'
or do it with someone is really important.'
It even embodies this idea of community.'
And then the last project like this I wanted to show'
is the Writer's Theater Project, which"
is a small theater on the north side of Chicago'
in a kind of suburb village north of the city.'
This just completed a couple years ago.'
It has a 250-seat theater, a thrust stage,'
and it has a small black box as well.'
It's located here.
That site-- you can see where Lake Michigan'
is in the background.
And it is just a sleepy little village'
where this incredible theater company had located.'
They were operating out of a back of a bookstore,'
and they also were operating out of a--'
in a lady's library club.
So they were in found spaces, and they wanted to kind of move'
to the next level.
You know, I think one of the things we really'
like if a project comes in front of us is,'
when the organization is trying to use architecture'
to become the next thing that they can be.'
So it's almost like design can help an organization"
with its identity, and it can help them advance as well.'
So here it was really the case.
But the town is very sleepy.
A lot of people just drove around, and not a lot'
of pedestrian activity.
So here we were trying to tap into this--'
I don't know-- the feeling, the spirit of street theater,"
theaters that don't have buildings,"
or outdoor theaters, places that engage'
the community around them.
You know, during the Elizabethan era'
there were these in-yards that were in courtyards,'
so people could be on the second floor looking down as well,'
and the stage is kind of thrust out there.'
And then we thought of-- maybe this idea'
could be a lobby or something that'
could activate the city and the civic aspect of the project.'
So we designed-- so I'm just going to talk mostly"
about the lobby right now.
It's just this part of the building that is on the street"
and adjacent to the park that connects to the ground'
floor and the second floor, and then'
can be used as an impromptu stage, a place for talks'
before and after the show.
That was another thing.
They really wanted these conversations'
to continue after the theater performances.'
Which I think theater has a unique quality'
in that it can bring up difficult issues,'
and it gets people talking.
So there just needs to be a space for that.'
We tried this again, this vierendeel kind'
of truss that's got a walkway around it."
And the idea here was that the walkway could be at the canopy'
level, and it could be a place where people could go outside'
at intermission.
And really, using wood in this way and intention-- it'
was a challenge.
You know?
Like, I guess it could have been steel,'
but we really wanted it to be wood and push wood'
to the maximum, to be doing what it does really well,'
which is working intention.
And so to do that we have this--
we called the "cat\'s paw."
It's this connection between the bottom of the beam and the wood"
battens.
And it's really interesting.
I'll show you a little bit more about it."
But we couldn't-- you know, finding people to make these"
things is sometimes a challenge.
We found this firm called "Trillium Dell"'
that were located, like, out in the middle of nowhere.'
I mean, like, nowhere.
Middle of Illinois.
And there's amazing craftspeople working there"
with a lot of high-tech equipment.'
We went out there.
We had to because we had to test this detail and the word'
intention.
You can see this rig here, which is pulling the wood apart.'
And actually the test is over, and it succeeded.'
That's why everyone is so happy.
[laughter]
The rig itself started to fail, so they stopped the test'
and we surpassed the test.
But that connection was really important.'
And it's like-- you know, taking the design further than just"
what it looks like and trying to bring'
that concept all the way through, I think,'
is really a really important part about architecture for us.'
And here this is inserting these additional wood'
into the slats of the bottom of the cat paw.'
So instead of taking away material--'
like what you would do if you put a bolt through this--'
you're actually adding material in."
And this is what it kind of looks like up close'
after they start to be done.
I got to work on some of these, too.'
I mean, it was fun to do it.
And they invited us out there to do stuff in their shop as well.'
It was really amazing.
I also learned how to throw an ax.'
[laughter]
Because that's what you do in the middle of Illinois"
in the middle of winter when there's nothing else around,"
I guess.
But, anyway.
But these are projects that we really'
advance our own research.
We engage with a lot of different experts'
on different things.
And I feel like when people come to the building'
they can sense what the structure is doing.'
Like, that this is intention.
It's so thin.
You can feel it, like, hanging there.'
And it makes really nice space outside.'
But what's really great about this building, I think,"
is that the civic role that we intended for it to have it--'
it's serving that for the theater company,"
but it's also starting to do things that we didn't expect,"
which are really exciting.
Like, these steps.
It turns out that kids are coming here after school'
and studying on the steps.
And they're opening it up and they're"
adding a cafe and a restaurant.
So it's starting to improve the city."
The city has had to come up with a new ordinance'
because there were not enough restaurants in the past,'
so they had certain things in their code.'
And now there's, you know, half a dozen restaurants that"
have come because this theater is really'
starting to promote walkability and action in the city.'
So it's kind of nice.
And we're trying to find these metrics so that we"
can measure these things.
And a lot of it is difficult because it's"
qualitative information.
But it's something that I think-- again,"
I think that a big part of research really needs to be'
for us-- for all of us--
about why architecture helps and how it is successful.'
It is the design.
It is everything about it.
And if you don't have the design part, it often doesn't work."
So I want to understand that better.'
Finally, just a couple of the more urban scale'
projects we've been focusing on over the last about six years."
And we've even started an urban practice within the office."
But it's based on connecting urban design and architecture,"
so it really always has this architectural scale to it'
as well.
So Polis Station is a project that'
was, again, self-initiated.
It was a reaction to what's going"
on in the country between police--'
the violence between police and community members.'
And it was something that-- at the time'
we were designing a fire station in Brownsville and Brooklyn,'
and we noticed that with fire stations or fire rescue,'
people really like the fire rescue workers.'
And they actually-- it is kind of like a welcoming place.'
So we started to wonder, if the police station could possibly'
be improved would that help with these difficult relationships?'
In Chicago, about 20 years ago, they'
built all these prototype police stations.'
And, you know, even though they're modern,"
they never really asked anyone in the communities what they'
wanted in their police station.
They're all identical and kind of plopped"
on the different sites.
And so we were wondering, if we could look at the history'
and ask people about what they wanted in a police station,'
what would they come up with.
If you look at the history of the police stations--'
and this is kind of focusing on the Northeast, I guess--'
from Chicago to the Northeast-- they were once'
not even buildings at all.
They were like little warming stations that people would use.'
And these were community members who would just'
walk around the neighborhood and make sure'
that everything was safe.
So they actually came from the community.'
And so what's changed is that the car is introduced."
The police station has become surrounded by parking lots.'
So there are even--
this is in Chicago.
They're even more separated from the community."
And the police don't live there.
In fact, they're not like the communities"
that they're policing.
And there's a big, huge distrust between these two groups."
And so we thought of taking this example, which'
is in North Lawndale in Chicago, the 10th district police'
department--
I also taught a studio where we looked at the situation'
in New York.
But here these gigantic parking lots and hugely-wide roads--'
130-foot wide-- are working to separate the community'
from the police station.
And actually people are scared to go anywhere near the police'
station because they're afraid to be injured and shot,"
but also afraid to even go in and report a crime.'
And so it's really dysfunctional in a major way."
So we were able to gather some community members from North'
Lawndale, and police, and we did a meeting with the two groups'
together.
And we didn't work for either one of them."
And we asked them how to improve the police station so'
that there would be more trust.
And a lot of this was based on the recommendations'
from the Obama Administration that'
came out with a community policing report.'
And the things that they came up with were really cool.'
Like, you know shared--
these would all be on the public side of the station.'
Shared compute resources, free Wi-Fi, cafes,'
even a barbershop.
The barbershop I like the best, because that would be--'
you know, you're basically trying to build connections"
between the two groups and have them--'
so when police are in the street,'
they recognize people and they don't just assume--"
or, they treat them like people.
And there would be conversations,'
and there would be less confrontational interactions.'
So the idea that this would open up on the public side'
and really be part of a community center.'
What's really cool is that this project--"
people have called me from around the country that'
are implementing these things in police stations'
around the country, which is really exciting.'
In ours we raised enough money to put these sports courts'
on the parking lot and take away some of the parking.'
That was one of the things that both the police'
and the community members wanted.'
But there was some fear about going near the police station.'
But we went back a year later and interviewed people,'
and the parents were saying that they really'
felt that their kids were safer now playing outside the police'
station.
And so I think there's a very small step,"
but there's something in that, and that we were you know"
showed images of how this thing could really'
start to take shape.
And we want to see that advance further.'
So finally, last thing is just a project'
that's in progress right now on the urban scale."
It's the Memphis Riverfront Concept Plan."
Memphis is a city on the Mississippi River,'
which is an incredible 2,300-mile river that goes'
through these States.
This is Memphis up here underneath the key.'
Because this drawing is all about the river,'
they don't really care that there's a city right here."
But it's an incredible drawing that"
shows the change that is present in this river.'
And Memphis was once a really major trading destination,'
on par with Chicago.
And it was a historic place that also'
has very difficult histories.
And you can see here on the riverfront, this space--'
we were asked to do a riverfront plan'
that, along the lines of the Polis Station, in fact,'
to try to knit together some of the amenities owned by the city'
but maybe not being fully utilized.'
And so we really delved into a lot of the history here.'
The plan we already issued, but we're"
starting to focus in now on one piece of it, which'
is at the Fourth Bluff area.
And it's a landing where a lot of the trade"
happened and steamships came in.
Cotton was traded.
Slaves worked on the site, so there's this--"
different perceptions of this place, in Fourth Bluff.'
And we're really trying to understand"
this landing in a new way, in looking'
at its materials and the things that happened there.'
And it's a really very interesting thing."
There's nothing going on there now."
I think it's about 800 feet long,"
and it has all these different types of geology, stones'
that were coming from upriver--
nine different types of geologic material found in the landing.'
And it's kind of scruffy and it's--"
because they really just don't know what to do with it."
And when we started this project it'
was right around the time where Tammy Sawyer was'
leading this charge to take down these Confederate statues.'
So you've probably read a lot in the newspaper"
the past few days because of the anniversary of Dr. King being'
assassinated in Memphis.
There's just a charged atmosphere,"
and there's a desire to move forward."
So what we've started the process of doing"
is to think about the landing really as kind of a new,'
almost like a horizontal memorial or a marker'
for Memphis that would be an inclusive memorial or marker.'
And it's an idea that--
it seems really strong, but there's no way"
we could do it on our own.
We want to engage people, and started'
a process of doing that--
to ask them what's important about Memphis,"
and maybe somehow get those stories'
into the stones on the landing.
So really just in the beginning the process'
some of the tools that we're using are interviews."
That's Tammy Sawyer, actually, and that's"
Heinz, in our office, sketching the interviews'
and getting the words down that are used,'
and recording the sounds and walking around'
on tours with people to get this really varied story of what'
happened there.
So I think the role of the architect in this'
is really just to be the listening'
party, to not impose ourself on it at all right now,'
and just get the stories.
And then we can start to think about how'
to translate those into the material that is there'
at the landing.
And so I don't know where it's going to go,"
but I hope that you will check back in with us at the Venice'
Biennale, where we'll be showing some"
of the work about this project.
So with that, I'm finished.
[chuckling] Thank you very much.
[applause]
And we can take questions.
Yeah.
Sure.
It would be great if you have some questions.'
I mean, maybe I could just start with something'
a little bit-- just trying to contextualize the work.'
I mean, I'm sure everyone knows that your practice is"
quite unusual.
It's not really a kind of typical practice"
in terms of the diversity of things,'
in terms of the relationship between small-scale and'
large-scale, in terms of the way that you're actually"
focusing on this material dimension, and just'
really the whole connection with nature,'
with ecology, with waste.
This is probably quite different from the experience'
that you had working at OMA when you first'
graduated from the GSD.
So it might be interesting for people'
to just know what is the sort of transition'
that you went through?
How did it evolve when you set up the practice to gradually'
kind of end up where you are?
I think something about that kind of history'
would be very interesting.
Yeah.
OK.
Well, one of the things about the GSD-- and my thesis'
here was really on wastewater and how'
it could be transferred into clean water,'
but also how it could make a space'
active in the public realm.
But when I really learned from working at OMA'
was the power of programming the buildings.'
And also there was a more--
at the time, in Europe, the consultants,'
engineers that I was working with'
were really top ones in sustainability and structure.'
And they worked for the owner in the case of Europe,'
whereas in American system the consultants'
were all under the architect.
And so what it did--
that relationship there-- it made'
the architect have to listen to the engineer more.'
And so it was actually--
which was great for me, because I love structure.'
I mean, my father was a structural engineer'
and I want to get that information early on.'
Because a lot of times I feel like one of the first choices'
is, what is the material structure of the building.'
So that was a take-away.
And just being around Rem, was is a great thinker,'
and working on lots of things simultaneously.'
But for me I wanted to create an office that would be, well,'
frankly indulging the things that I like.'
[laughter]
Which are people, the environment, and materials.'
And so I just didn't let the forms that were out"
there dictate what I was going to do,'
and I just followed what I wanted to do.'
Luckily it produced some projects'
that allowed me to start the practice and to expand it.'
But I think now I surround myself'
with like-minded people that also like these same things,'
and we like each other.
And it doesn't mean we don't disagree, but it is a real--"
like, a total life experience--
very full-- that I've created organically over the years."
And we keep tweaking it now, because it's not just"
coming from me.
It's really coming from the whole collective brain"
of the whole studio.
And how does that affect the organization of the office?'
Like, the people that you hire or people who work there?'
Right.
So it ends up being that--
well, when we started to scratch a little bit'
into this urban space and realizing'
that we didn't have urban designers in the office, we--"
but people wanted to work on these kind of projects--'
we just started to bring in people like that.'
So, you know, one of the first people'
was a former client from the Park'
District of the city of Chicago who was an urban designer.'
And so, you know, starting to try'
to find the right people that we wanted to work with.'
And it's an ongoing thing.
So we are always tweaking what the organization is like.'
There's a lot of design thinking about the organization itself."
Like how it can be more effective, how we'
can get the projects we want.
And balancing the profit projects with the projects'
that make no profit.
[chuckles]
Yeah.
Any questions?
Please.
Hello.
Thank you very much for your lecture.'
It was phenomenal.
Big fan here.
How much of your--
just to get inside the business model specificities.'
One of the things that I notice--'
there's a huge amount of research,"
but also human hours, quantities of research.'
And now you're a big firm, but it"
seems that that was the case since early on.'
And for in a small firm, this is money that it's pouring out"
and might not getting in.
Two questions.
How much of your firm there is on research and development,'
like, you put in and you [inaudible] in,'
in terms of research unit?
And, how much you did before and how much'
that has changed in terms of honest research'
that it's paying back?
I think the project--
some of the research starts building up,'
and so we had to spend-- we put time into making it accessible'
and organized.
We have our own library searches,'
and we have our own research--
we have software that can allow us'
to access the research so new teams can always get access'
to it.
And with lots of tags and keywords'
and things that-- it makes it accessible.'
And so not every project has to start with as much.'
Like, there's always a basis to start with."
So that's been improved.
But I think as a young practice, as starting out,'
you're going to be doing more research in the beginning"
probably, because you treat it like'
you would a project at school.
Which, I think we just never grew out of the school thing,'
I think is what happened.
And we still treat the projects in a very similar way to studio'
here.
And so it's just more fun to work on it like that."
But, yeah.
The balance-- I'm not the business genius behind this."
It's just I know what I want to do, and then we tried it."
We have people that--
even now we have a chief financial officer who can--'
she helps figure out, like, how much'
we can put on this or that.
So that's how it--
and it is, like I said, constantly a balancing thing'
and trying to tweak and make it better.'
Good question.
Hi.
Up here.
Thank you so much for the lecture.'
So my question is, if you could share to us a little bit'
of the constraints that you have faced'
as a female architect on the field'
when you bring innovative, different types of processes'
in design.
So when you show the work in Chicago'
and how you are bringing the community'
and really showing the design as a process'
and you even give the comment of how we, as architects, should'
be more listeners than anything else, so putting yourself'
in a state of total anonymity.
And so I want you to share a bit of that.'
And also perhaps suggestions as a contribution to our field,'
to move forward in that.
Not just as a woman, but as an architect in general.'
Thank you.
On the process side, I think there is a desire to listen.'
But then it also has to be coupled with-- like, it's"
pure creative periods.
So a lot of times we are in the absorbing mode,'
in the research mode.
We definitely turn it off and then just go make things.'
But my hope is that the knowledge'
that we have from listening and from studying and doing'
the research on other projects-- it gets into the projects.'
But you still have to--
you know, I'm just calling attention to the point"
that you do have to kind of, like,'
turn off that mode at some point to be'
able to make things and be free to criticize your own designs.'
And so being attentive to your own process, whatever'
works for you, is really--
that seems to be very important to us.'
We look at our process, and we refine it'
so that we can be more efficient,'
but also do better work.
So, yeah.
And in terms of difficulties--
you know, I never think of things as difficulties,'
I guess.
Like, if it's something problematic,"
then try to turn it into an advantage somehow.'
It doesn't always work.
But, yeah.
So usually, if you see a problem,'
it can always be looked at from a different point of view.'
And there's something to be gained there."
That's just a more philosophical answer,"
but I know that it's not easy.
It's not easy all the time.
Thank you.
Really great lecture.
I had a question.
So there's a lot of conversations and debates"
about how architects can have a larger impact on a larger'
scale in the city.
So, like, how to move beyond simply designing maybe'
singular buildings that might be phenomenal'
but might have limited impact.
Do you think that the expansion of your practice,'
to do projects on an urban scale and a larger scale'
is sort of a response that sort of arises out'
of a desire to have, like, a larger impact within the city?'
Oh, I think definitely the idea of--'
we want to be--
I think architects are uniquely positioned'
to be able to take very complex data sets and information'
and turn it into design, which is'
what speaks to so many people.
And so it can also help move an issue further along.'
And so, yeah.
It's like being an instigator of some things to make it happen."
And maybe you can do something that will just'
push-- nudge it over the edge.
It's a process that--
you can get in trouble doing this, too.'
I mean, for example, sometimes we've"
been threatened with repercussions'
for doing certain projects.
But you just can't let it bother you."
You have to do what you think that you want to do'
and what you think you can--
I guess in every project we're always trying"
to find what is the issue.
Sometimes it might be a technology issue'
or a formal issue.
Or, you know, it's not always a major, strong, public issue."
But trying to find out what the question is--'
that is the important thing.
Like, so how do you frame the question for your project?'
What are you trying to answer?
And if you can set that up, which we do here,'
which we do in studio all the time--'
and that question has to be something'
that other people are interested in, too.'
So it's not only your own personal question."
This is where I probably differ from a lot of architects.'
So I want the question to resonate with others.'
Other architects and other public.'
And so then when you start working on that.'
And it helps to move the needle, I think.'
Out here.
Thank you so much for your lecture.'
Oh, hello.
I'm in the staircase.
[laughing]
Oh, hi.
It was really nice to see the amount of research that'
goes into your projects before the design'
and building of a project.
But also the effort that you put into actually'
prove things, like assumptions that were'
made during the design process.
So you mentioned thermal bridging,'
and that might not turn out to be as important'
as people assume it to be.
Were there other assumptions that architects'
make quite often that you found during a lot of your projects'
that turned out to be just untrue?'
Hm.
Yeah.
Well, I especially like pushing the limits on materials.'
So, like all of those--
like the tubes that have to withstand the loads'
or the wood that has to be working intention,'
those are things--
I think that the materials have a lot of qualities'
that they don't get credit for.
So it's just about finding the right application"
for that material used in that way.'
But that is one of the things that I get really excited'
about.
But you do find assumptions in every category, I guess.'
And those are kind of one of the things that you can start'
to form your question around.
You know, it's most fun if you can blow away people's mind"
when they see your building.
[laughter]
Hi.
Thank you again so much for your lecture.'
I really appreciated it.
So I really-- going through all of these pictures of clear'
research, of you guys making, and clearly being a making'
studio, do you find that with the introduction of technology,'
when you're starting to really dive into the project--"
specifically with the skyscraper competition--'
do you find a disconnect between the two?'
Or really, how do you merge those in a successful way?'
Oh, well, they're already merged."
Because a lot of the making that we do'
is assisted by digital making.
But we do try to always have that--'
I think that's, again, one of these--"
like, a fetish that I have about working'
with materials and myself.
And I don't want to give that up."
But I think you can study things in both analog'
and digital ways.
And we do.
Especially using-- I think the best technology right now'
is really the data itself, the data'
of how you can find information.
Like, we'll do things in cities before going in,"
and we have so much information before we'
even set foot in the city that you can get.'
So that's like a really exciting tool."
And all the other tools as well.
But, like, with the hand-making, there's something between--"
for me anyway-- between the brain and the hand'
that is just very enjoyable.
You think of ideas that you wouldn't otherwise"
get to, maybe.
And so, yeah.
It's just one of these things that--"
the material qualities are important,'
but also the material qualities in the model-making.'
So actually a lot of times we'll make the models"
with analogous qualities to what the real material will be.'
So if it's going to be bent wood,"
we'll wet some cardboard laminated layers"
and get it to bend to make the model.'
Do you know what I mean?
So it wouldn't be the same if you just printed it out."
So you learn things, try to use it to learn things'
about materials.
Yeah.
Which is nice to work with the California College of the Arts'
right now, because they're totally"
about marrying up the analog and the digital world.'
So that's a new product that we're getting going on now."
So, yeah.
Thank you.
Anybody else?
Yes.
Maybe while you're getting the mic, one thing that would be--"
not to put you on the spot, but--'
Uh-oh.
[chuckles]
No, just-- I think because there are'
a lot of people who are new to the school'
and who sort of maybe don't know that we have been putting"
a lot of emphasis on research and also more and more'
on the relationship between sort of design-related research--'
and that's really something that you're doing."
And you're doing that in the office."
But I also know that that's something"
that's very evident in the studios that you're doing."
But I know as of next year you'll also"
be trying to conduct, in a way, certain kinds of research'
outside of the studio here, which is probably'
both related to what you might be doing in the office,'
but also different.
And I think maybe just in the spirit of tonight's open house,"
it would be good if you could share some thoughts about what'
you see as potential domains of research that are exciting,'
that might be happening next year or in the years to come?'
Yeah.
OK.
And then we can finish with you.
No, that's a good question.
And, you know, some of the threads that have been'
in the work about materials--
I've been more and more interested"
in the materials in their second life.'
And so kind of working on the idea of reducing carbon'
in our world through making more of the second life of materials'
waste.
And it really does touch all the categories,'
if you think back to the Tour Montparnasse.'
Like, what happens to all of this glass'
coming off of a building?
Like, so it had already used its first life.'
Where is it going next?
So more and more important with a world that'
is accumulating a lot of stuff in our terrestrial and marine'
environments.
And so if those ideas about reuse, recycling, and thinking'
about the waste stream could be a launching point'
and a resiliency issue as well.
I think those things will come together'
in an interesting way that will be a focus of the five years'
that I'll be able to be here and work on it."
So what I like about the issue is,'
it doesn't limit to the typology or a city, per se."
But it could be something that goes'
across a lot of different categories.'
Hi.
I'd like to first echo some of the previous comments"
and also say thank you for coming and giving your lecture.'
I thought it was very interesting.'
Particularly your final project where'
you're talking about re-contextualizing the Memphis"
waterfront and touching on the controversy surrounding'
Confederate war memorials.
I was wondering-- because I'm from South Carolina, where"
we have lots of not only Confederate war'
memorials, but also architecture like plantations, that's"
tied to this sort of very problematic political ideology'
from the Antebellum period.
So I was wondering, with this type of architecture,'
how you think we, as architects, should think'
of these sorts of buildings, and if we have a responsibility'
to try to re-contextualize it, or maybe bulldoze it, or take'
an entirely different approach?
Hm.
Well, OK.
That's a very good question.
And I think what--
the first is to know where you're working."
Because there are-- and you can't know it"
without talking to the people there and really'
getting the lay of the land from across a representative'
transect of the city, not just one group that is your client.'
You know?
So that, I think, falls on the responsibility'
of the architect.
And one of the things we discovered,'
like with the Civil War memorials,'
were that a lot of them were placed, like,'
in the late '60 and '70s.
So they obviously weren't done at the time because of some,"
you know--
they were done for political reasons.'
So kind of like understanding all of the complexity of it'
is the first thing to do, and not'
being afraid to find some things that you--'
you are going to find things that'
are very difficult things, that unravel.'
But don't be afraid to do that, as long"
as you are engaged with the community'
that you're working in.
That's the main message.
That it can't be done in our studios away from that."
And that will help open up the path of what to do.'
So you have to be able to--
as a designer it's a little bit difficult"
going in without knowing what you want to make yet.'
You know?
But if you let the process unfold, it will become clear,'
I think.
So, yeah.
Good question.
Jeanne, thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you all for coming.
[applause]
