Good evening, everyone.
Thank you so much for joining us for tonight's event."
I'm Marrissa.
And this is Lindsay.
And we're the co-chairs of Women and Design here in the school."
And we're honored to be representing"
the organization introducing tonight's guest, Rosa Sheng."
We're extremely lucky to have her here tonight."
She's in town from San Francisco where"
she's the principal at SmithGroupJJR and the 2018"
president and founding chair of Equity by Design, a committee'
of the San Francisco AIA chapter.'
With some 22 years of experience in architecture and design'
of roses led a variety of award-winning and'
internationally acclaimed projects,'
ranging from the highly technical development'
of Apple's distinctly minimal glass"
retail stores to the innovative, and sustainable LEED gold'
certified Lokey Graduate School of Business'
at Mills College in Oakland, home state of California.'
In 2013 fueled by the persistent and striking inequity'
of representation in architectural practice'
where women compose maybe 12% to 18%'
of AIA members, licensed architects, and senior firm'
leadership, Rosa founded the committee, Equity by Design.'
She's initiated a national movement"
for equitable practice catalyzed by the circulation'
of two pivotal Equity in Architecture surveys--'
one in 2014, one in 2016--
surveying nearly 9,000 respondents,'
representing all 50 states and nations on six continents.'
The next survey will take place in the spring of this year.'
And we look forward to both its findings and its impact.'
These surveys have teased out the underlying tensions'
that persist throughout careers in architecture and design,'
setting oneself up for professional development,'
achieving pay equity, and maintaining flexibility'
between work and other life commitments.'
They revealed career pinch points,'
including the time and financial burden'
of the educational process, paying professional dues,'
obtaining licensure, balancing caregiving roles'
and navigating the glass ceiling--'
which brings us to the missing 32%.'
It's a troubling metric one, which tells us"
that while schools have reached nearly equal rates'
of enrollment and graduation, architecture'
as a professional practice still loses'
32% of its women between graduation and licensure.'
Though this may be our present reality, Equity by Design'
tells us that this doesn't have to be the future."
They've hosted quarterly workshops and hackathons"
as a means to turn these metrics into action and change.'
Equity by Design has sold out five symposia,'
delivered presentations across the US and abroad,'
and received widespread media coverage'
from the likes of Architect Magazine, Architectural Record,'
the Wall Street Journal, the New York Times, TEDx Philadelphia,'
and NPR.
Together, Rosa and her team have initiated a national call'
to action for all gender identities'
to help realize the goal of equitable practice'
and to retain talent, advance the profession,'
and communicate the value of design to society.'
So please join us in welcoming Rosa.'
[applause]
Thank you so much.
I know it's the beginning of the semester"
and you're starting studio and classes again."
So I really am thankful that you made time in your schedule'
to be here tonight.
So let's if I can advance.
OK.
So I'd like to start off the discussion,"
before we get into the meat of it,'
with a question I always tend to ask.'
And that is to get everybody on the same page.'
There seems to be a lot of confusion about the difference'
between equity and equality.
So when we talk about equity, we like'
to make sure that everybody has the same understanding.'
So how many people in the room-- no right or wrong answer,'
no judgment--
think they have a good idea of the definition between the two,'
just show of hands, again, no judgment.'
And that's usually what we see.
So I found this meme while back and I like to start with it'
in terms of defining the two.
Equality as it's traditionally meant is everybody"
gets the same exact resources, the same exact piece'
of the pie, regardless of the outcome, all right?'
So that's fair.
And that's just if everybody gets the same thing."
In the equity lens, on the right side of the meme,'
there's this idea that equity is about minimizing barriers"
to maximize the potential for success,'
so people acknowledging that we need different resources'
at different times.
One size does not fit all.
And the people with the resources'
that don't need them for that particular situation"
or challenge recognize in others the need'
and, therefore, have this empathy eye'
of providing that resource.
So on the right, there is a win-win.'
Everybody can see over the fence, World Series,'
you know, Boston Red Sox, yay, team, right?'
And then this idea that somebody raised'
was really interesting to me.
Well, what if I'm always the tall person giving out"
my resources?
What about that?
So I happened to say, well, the likelihood that you'll actually"
be the short person in your lifetime is ever so increasing.'
We see that with the natural disasters and things just'
randomly happening.
Shootings today was reported in Kentucky,'
the 11th of the year that was reported'
and the 50th of the semester in all schools.'
So the likelihood that something bad could happen to any of us'
is increasing.
So as architects, I ask the question,'
why does equity matter in architecture?'
But we start off with the question of,'
why do architects matter?
We know that there's some anecdotal conversations"
about architects losing their value'
and people not understanding what architects do.'
How do we create a value system where we are recognized'
and we do meaningful work?
In this sketch, comedy sketch with I'
Love Lucy-- if you haven't seen it,"
I recommend you go to YouTube.
Lucy and Ethel are homemakers.
And they go and they want to seek jobs.'
So they go to the chocolate factory.'
And throughout the day, they have'
failed to accomplish any of their tasks.'
The last chance they have is to go on this conveyor belt'
and just wrap the chocolates.
Pretty easy, right?
So the conveyor belt goes faster and faster.'
And they stuff the chocolates in their shirts.'
They stuff the chocolates in their hats and their mouths'
just to keep up appearances.
How many people feel like you're stuffing"
the chocolates in your mouth, keeping up appearances?'
So your reward is this, the same as Lucy and Ethel.'
The boss comes in, sees you're doing an amazing job, and says,"
great job, ladies, speed her up.
The conveyor belt keeps going faster and faster.'
So it's against your own best interest"
to be perceived as just getting by and hiding your challenges,'
right?
Let's see if we can get this to advance."
And then the third question, why does architecture matter?'
So I grew up with this idea in the suburbs'
that architecture was about tract houses and malls'
because that was the experience of my immediate surroundings.'
So when we have a low standard and we don't question design"
and we don't educate the public about design,"
this is what we end up with.
We end up with Malls of America.
And that changed for me when I went to China one'
summer to visit my grandfather.
And he made sure I toured a lot of places'
of value, of monuments, the Forbidden City, the Great Wall.'
And he was great in educating me about architecture'
and saying that architecture wasn't"
about the immediacy of its use or the people,'
it was rather a time capsule of a civilization meant'
to last beyond any one person's lifetime"
and to provide profound impact.
And at that moment that he was saying all this to me'
in Chinese and I was trying to translate it'
in my head of what all it meant, I realized at that point'
that I wanted to have profound impact'
and I wanted to be an architect.
So I went to school at Syracuse University.'
Shout out, go Orange to Syracuse alum in the house.'
Did the traditional education, learned about architecture'
through a Eurocentric lens.
I questioned that because I came from'
a non-Eurocentric heritage.
As you saw the Great Wall and the Forbidden City,'
where did that plug into this Eurocentric learning'
about design?
But I loved all that I learned.
And I sketched.
And you can see the Pantheon.
And Syracuse had a Florence program.'
And we studied and we traveled throughout Europe.'
And I had this idea that I was going'
to become the next great architect, whether it'
was Le Corbusier or Frank Lloyd Wright or Frank Gehry,'
I was going to be that next famous architect.'
Because that's what we were taught."
Well, I graduated in a recession.'
And ironically, I ended up, my first job'
was designing malls, going back to my roots, right, and casinos'
and bathroom details and elevator details.'
And I said I wanted more.
And I was questioning at that point'
whether architecture was the right profession for me.'
And my employers at the time said, well, this is it.'
You've got to pay your dues.
You've got to-- we're showing you the ropes."
You've got to do the licensure thing"
and, you know, build up your experience.'
And I thought to myself, well, that's not good enough for me."
What do I do next?
Well luckily for me, a friend and alumni from Syracuse'
lived, worked in Pittsburgh for Bohlin Cywinski Jackson'
and said, hey, you why don't you come out to Pittsburgh?"
We're doing some really cool projects."
There's this company called Pixar Animation Studios."
They do digital animation.
What was that, at the time, right?'
So, OK, this sounds really crazy and interesting.'
Let's go to Pittsburgh so we can go out to California."
And, of course, that didn't work out right away."
I spent a year in Pittsburgh, but got to work'
and was luckily enough privileged to work'
with Steve Jobs.
We had weekly, bi-weekly meetings with him where'
we would fly out to Pittsburgh.
But towards the middle of the project,'
the client, the facility, head of facilities'
asked us if we could do anything differently'
because the progress of the project'
wasn't moving fast enough.
Steve wasn't satisfied with the designs."
And we weren't communicating fast enough"
flying back and forth.
So they took us out to dinner, plied us with drinks,'
and asked us what we could do differently.'
And the craziest thing is that I said,'
you can move us out to California.'
And everybody laughed at this crazy idea.'
But six months-- less than that-- three months later,'
they shipped the team out.
And that became the San Francisco office'
for Bohlin Cywinski Jackson.
And we had this incredible time with incredible opportunities'
as project architect of the Pixar Animation Studios'
project, the Steve Jobs building.'
And it was a lesson learned in not'
being afraid to ask the crazy question'
or proposing the crazy answer.
So fast forward.
At that time, he had gone back to Apple.'
Whoops, sorry.
And he was starting this crazy idea of a retail store'
for just Apple products.
And at that time, there were only about 3%'
of the market share.
And people laughed and said look at Compaq.'
They weren't able to do it.
You're not going be able to do it either."
And he challenged that idea.
And he had this reality distortion field.'
Some of you have-- may have heard of that phrase.'
But he questioned and said, well, why not?'
And he pushed us really hard in the development'
of the first Apple Stores, the high profile'
stores with the glass staircases that didn't exist at the time,"
to say, why can't we do this?
Why can't we have an all glass structural staircase"
without steel structural supports?'
So we put on our reality distortion lenses with him.'
And we challenged the impossible.'
So suspending disbelief for just long'
enough so that we could iterate and iterate and finally'
came up with a solution that is now ubiquitous,'
so building glass staircases instead of glass ceilings.'
And luckily I was fortunate enough to be on the patent'
because I knew at some point people wouldn't believe"
that I was on that project.
And I thought, that's going to be a good thing later on"
to have my name on the patent.
You could see from the picture on the right'
that my husband is in the photo with me.'
We had our photos taken at the glass staircase close'
to the eve of the opening of the store.'
And it was a joke, actually.
Because when I got engaged they said,'
why don't you get married in the Apple store?"
And we laughed and said, ha ha.
We didn't get married there, but we"
had wedding photos taken because it was pouring rain outside'
and it was close by.
Good photo op.
So last of the Apple projects I worked on'
was the cube in New York City in GM Plaza.'
And at that point, I didn't think"
that gender was a barrier to my advancement'
as progressing as an architect.
But then I got married and I got pregnant with my first child.'
And I would go to meetings.
And my belly was swelling.
And the developer at the time, Harry Macklowe,'
he would joke around and he would say, which one of you'
was responsible for this?
Was it you?
Was it you?
And it was, of course, all men and one women, right?'
So that was the time I thought, hey, this isn't fair."
This is weird.
This is awkward.
But luckily I had a good comeback,'
which was to say, well, Harry, I'm"
going to name the kid Macklowe after you.'
And then he said no, no, no, don't do that."
So that was kind of funny.
And at the opening, I did bring my daughter and my husband.'
And an amazing thing happened because I'
announced that I was--
I was retiring from the Apple retail world.'
I was going to do other projects that allowed me'
to navigate work life balance.
And then a surprising thing happened.'
Steve said, oh, that's too bad.
But why don't you come out celebrate with us tonight?"
We're going out to dinner with the team."
And we'd love for you to come with us,"
but we only have one spot at the table,'
so your husband and your child can't come, sorry."
And I said, oh my gosh, chance of a lifetime.'
But I couldn't go because at the back of my head,"
there are barriers.
I was breastfeeding at the time.
I wasn't going to tell him that.
And I just said, sorry, I'm so flattered that you asked,"
but I can't go.
And he was puzzled.
Nobody says no to me, right?
And I thought stupid, chance of a lifetime, who'
would ever give up dinner with Steve Jobs, right?'
So in the middle of the day comes back again.'
And he says, all right, I've got a spot for your husband,"
but no kids tonight.
Can you get a babysitter in New York City?'
And, again, no way, I couldn't do it, right?"
I wasn't leaving my nine-month-old behind"
or trying to get a babysitter.
And the funniest thing happened at the end of the day, which'
is that the room was packed.
And he comes across the room.
It was the parting of the Red Sea, like Moses.'
And he says this, all right, you drive a hard bargain.'
The kid can come.
But if she poops, she pees, she cries, she's out."
What an invitation, right?
But luckily I knew him for the time'
that we worked together on Pixar and Apple.'
And I knew that he was trying to be the tough guy.'
He was trying to be the Wizard of Oz,'
you know, the man behind the curtain, tough on the outside,'
but soft on the inside.
And I realized at that point-- we did go to dinner--'
that he was my biggest champion.
And it was a kind of aha moment that in order'
to succeed in this profession not only do'
we need champions that speak up for us'
and ask us literally to the table multiple times,'
but we also need to be and cultivate champions.'
We need to pay it forward to the next generation.'
So fast forward, my next project was'
an all women's business school in Mills College Oakland,"
California.
And it was a new project type for me'
and awareness about the lack of women in the c-suite.'
So they recognized that is a need.'
They created this program out of nothing, a startup'
with just 10 people the first year.'
So it was year five when they asked us to help them'
design this school with them.
And they wanted to walk the talk.'
So the school itself about business,'
socially responsible business.
And then they wanted to be able to have a building that'
was an experience, that inspired people'
to challenge what was possible.
So in the end, they also said that the team'
needed to have equal representation, so'
women in leadership positions.
We had a woman leading the structural engineering,'
mechanical engineering, superintendent, what have you,'
including myself as a project manager for the architects.'
And, again, it won LEED Gold first business school'
building in California and multiple awards.'
But it was this idea that it still inspires today'
and it grew and built this relationship'
with the school that hasn't ended,"
that they have a conference every year.'
It's the 10th Annual conference this year"
about social responsibility.
And it's a joy to go back every year"
to see that they're still walking the talk."
So at the end of that-- and as you could see, the school,'
the student body is diverse, so not just women, but men,'
people of color, people of all different socioeconomic'
backgrounds really hitting hard at these issues at being'
social entrepreneurs.
But then at the end of that, the recession hit in 2009'
and I had my second child.
And I was at a point in my career'
where I felt the barriers more so than I had ever done before'
and what translated into what we called'
pinch points in the survey.
There's this quote by Lin Manuel Miranda"
that's very poignant to me.
We all grapple with the paradox that tomorrow is not promised,'
but we make plans anyway.
What do we do when we feel like there's no support, when"
we feel like when we want to quit'
is this kind of marching order that we don't know what's"
coming, we can be afraid, or we can'
make plans to solve those issues and challenges.'
I was at a point when I was ready to leave architecture.'
I was at a very depressed moment in my life, postpartum,'
what have you, compounded by the recession.'
But there were these lights shining'
as examples of not quitting, whether it was architect'
Barbie with Despina Stratigakos and Kelly Hayes McAlonie,'
whether it was Caroline James, who was in audience tonight,'
and Arielle Assouline-Lichten with the petition for Denise'
Scott Brown, whether it was Beverly Willis'
Foundation or Lean In, those were lights to say keep going,'
do not quit.
And in that self evaluation moment'
there was this realization that women were not represented'
in architecture as we should be, that, again, the statistics'
show that we are--
as we graduate, we are about 50-50.'
And then that number diminishes quickly over time.'
So I went to my first missing 32% conference'
and was on a panel about negotiation.'
And after that, everybody was fired up and committed'
and said, we needed to do something.'
We're tired of just talking about it."
We need action.
What are you going to do?
So we were all fired up.
But then we said, yes, we need action.'
What are we going to do?
We're going to do a survey.
That's what we said.
We had no idea how to do a survey.'
We're going to find out what the problems are."
And then we'll solve that, right?"
And at that point, I felt like I committed to eating a whale.'
So Shel Silverstein has this poem'
about Melinda May, this little girl who touts she's"
going to eat this giant whale.
Everybody laughs at her and says,'
there's no way you could do it.
And she is so indignant and she says, by golly, yes, I can.'
Well, guess what?
She did eat the whale.
It took her 89 years.
And I thought, good god.
I do not want to be Melinda May.
I did commit to doing this, but I'm not going to do it alone."
I'm going to ask my friends to get their forks, come"
to the same table.
And while we could all be eating our own whales of frustration'
and challenge, why don't we eat the same whale, kind of gross?"
But it could be a vegan whale.
It's a figurative whale.
But if we all ate the same whale together,'
it will not take 89 or 110 years to see'
parity and equitable practice.
Because that is the reality.
If we wait and do nothing and just let natural things happen,'
it will take another 110 years according to statistics.'
And then another alum here, Alexandra Lange, a Loeb fellow,'
was published at the time, Architecture's Lean In Moment."
And this was an aha moment for me'
that she said, we need to create a new set of best practices'
that will, as a design project in and of itself'
based on data, shared examples, and interpretation.'
Once written, we need to find partners'
who will adopt them firm by firm, sector by sector.'
So that was our call to action.
First study was in 2014.
I'm not going to go over the details."
But you can find the information online in our full report.'
There is this concept of pinch points,'
the idea that throughout your career'
from when you graduate all the way through when you retire'
that there could be times of challenge and frustration'
that causes you to contemplate leaving not only your firm'
that you're in, but also architecture, potentially."
Hiring, whether you came out during a recession'
or an economic boom.
Paying your dues, doing those silly little bathroom details'
and the meaningless work.
Licensure, the challenges and the roadblocks'
and the cost of getting licensed.'
Or even the significance, why should we get licensed?'
How many people here just feel if licensure is important'
or not, just a show of hands.
Is it important?
OK, not too bad.
And then working parents which transformed'
into caregiving because it's not just about parents."
It's about self-care.
It's about care for your loved ones."
It's about care for the elderly and your community around you."
So time to care is an important topic.'
And finally, the glass ceiling.
Implicit bias is something that we'
knew was there anecdotally but didn't have a lot of research"
on.
So we decided to support that analysis.'
And in 2016, so we had 2,000 respondents in the first one.'
And then we had 8,664 in the second one.'
And then we added another layer called career dynamics.'
So not only are there pinch points,'
there are challenges that could happen to you'
at any point in your career, multiple times,'
or continuously throughout your career.'
Really depressing, right?
So can you find the right fit?
Can you find meaningful work?
Can you find work life integration?'
Can you find a place that will value'
you give you professional development opportunities?'
What if you wanted to take a break from architecture'
and do something else and come back?'
And what if pay equity or, you know,'
being valued for what you did was a constant struggle?'
And it is for many.
This study was not just about women in architecture.'
It was about men and women of all race and ethnicities.'
And we also did study non-binary gender to the point'
where we asked the question, but we'
didn't do well enough because we only got six respondents."
So this year, we're asking a lot of our allies"
to help circulate the survey so that we get more people so'
that we can start analyzing those'
that are in a different gender identifications.'
We did look at race and ethnicity,'
as you'll see on the right.
Predominantly, this is reflective of who is practicing'
right now in architecture.
And before I roll into what will be a giant tasting menu'
of a lot of information, I don't want you to get stressed out"
that the slides went by too quickly because the full video'
of the entire presentation-- this is about 50% of the slide'
data--
is on our website online.
And we will be publishing the final report,'
which has more information than you know what to do with.'
But it is there for you at your choosing.'
So here we go.
Most of our respondents varied in age.'
So you could see the younger respondent'
pool was mostly women.
The elder respondent pool was mostly men.'
To, of course, correct for that in our analysis,'
we always look at things by years of experience, not age,'
but how long you've been practicing in the profession."
So first order of magnitude is top reasons'
why people left their last job.
And this is concurrent with why people leave architecture'
as well, which we did in the previous study.'
Number one is better opportunities.'
Two is no promotion opportunities, low pay,'
relocation, long hours, lack of role models,'
lack of professional development,'
lack of meaningful work.
You'll see these themes repeating over and over again"
in different contexts.
So what are the top predictors of positive, strong firm'
culture that allows people to stay in their current job?'
Values, alignment of your values and the firm's values,"
that was a top answer.
A seat at the table, being able to be heard and also influence'
the decision making process.
And meaningful work, that your day-to-day work'
is not bathroom details, but something'
that's going to contribute to your long term career goals."
Those things that detracted from that attitude and idea'
about positive work culture were that there was no preparation'
by your firm supporting professional development'
and that you had no friends.
That's something that we kept seeing over and over again."
So friendships are important.
Why they're important, you will see later on."
When asked who do you ask for career guidance,'
we had a variety of answers.
We tend to see a slight trend with mostly men asking'
for senior--
guidance from senior leaders, less women.'
On the someone else side, we see more women'
asking those that are their peers,'
people outside their firms that are in senior leadership,'
or family and friends.
But the positive outcome of people who actually get access'
to senior leaders and guidance, you'
can see the uptick for both men and women,'
but significantly more for women in their career trajectory.'
So retention probability, energized work,'
career optimism, work life flexibility, and focus.'
We also looked at this new idea of a spectrum,'
the metrics of success in terms of burnout and engagement.'
So of the different 15 questions we asked people,'
do you have autonomy at work?
Again, a seat at the table?
Are you confident about your day-to-day work?'
Are you satisfied?
Do you find it meaningful, et cetera, et cetera?'
We found that most people answered high on the spectrum.'
So the three line is actually the neutral.'
And then anything above three is positive.'
But towards the end, we saw that work life, workload,'
and effective promotion process were constant challenges'
for both men and women.
Likelihood of engagement and burnout,'
so on the right side, those who are likely to be more engaged,'
they answered that they believed that their day to day work'
was connected to their long term career goals'
and that they were given feedback on an ongoing basis--'
so not the annual review, but a constant check'
in with the people that were their report-tos or senior'
leaders.
Those that felt that they are more likely to be burned out'
answered that their highest aspiration'
was to be an unlicensed staff designer, that they didn't know"
the performance evaluation criteria,'
or that they didn't have those valuable friendships."
When they were challenged, they didn't have anybody to go to."
So we shift gears to pay equity, which'
is an important topic that I know that a lot of you'
are concerned about talking to some of you at lunchtime.'
Average salaries are lower than other industries.'
And we know that already.
But even compounding that is the fact that men and women are'
paid differently, even starting at the beginning'
of their careers.
So approximately-- you can't see it"
because they're so close together-- but starting"
at the $3,000 difference between men and women'
on average between our respondents'
crescendoing all the way up to $25,000 to $30,000'
towards the end of careers.
So why is that happening?
We also cross-analyzed that with gender.'
So white males making the most than their not white male'
counterparts.
White females, and then, unfortunately,'
nonwhite female counterparts.
We also looked at it from the different roles'
that people play in firms, so not just'
by the years of experience.
We noticed, shockingly, that design principles had'
the biggest gap, making less than principals in charge,'
but making between $20,000 to $40,000 less'
are women who are design principals.'
And that is compounded by information'
that we see supporting that creativity bias.'
Namely, the Fuqua Business School Duke University'
did a study on creativity bias where they'
did five different studies.
The first of which, luckily for us,'
happened to be a simulation of architecture portfolios.'
So, again, simulated same exact images'
and sketches and renderings, one was'
named male applicant the other was a female applicant.'
And they were supposed to rate the creativity'
of both portfolios.
Well, guess what happened?
Both men and women rated the male portfolio'
more creative than the female portfolio.'
They also did that as an analysis with fashion design'
and didn't get the same results, that the variance was closer."
And then, to kind of additionally'
postulate if that creativity bias is there,'
we did the Google search challenge, which'
is to name the profession on Google, type it in,'
and then see what pops up.
So this was the first pop up of famous architect.'
All white male except for Zaha.
Yay, Zaha.
But we have to change that.
Success in negotiation, so part of pay equity'
has to do with your ability to negotiate.'
How many of you think you're good negotiators for design?"
You can advocate the heck out of design, yes?'
I hope so.
OK, we had that discussion at lunch'
while we are strong at advocating for our design'
aspirations and goals and thoughts and theories,'
we are weak at negotiating for our salaries and things'
we think are related to money, so contracts,'
change orders from the contractor.'
So we have to get better at this.'
Our survey said less than 35% men and women'
negotiated for their salaries when'
they found them unsatisfactory.
There is a taboo.
And then I know there's a lot of information here,"
but the takeaway is that the negotiators did better'
than the non-negotiators.
So if you don't ask, you don't get."
But then there's the soft skills of learning how to ask"
and when to ask and the value proposition'
that you bring to the table.
But, sadly, at a point where in the middle of the career,'
the women negotiators were still making about the same'
as the male non-negotiators.
So there is a bias towards women about negotiating.'
The likelihood of becoming a principal.'
Again, alarming aha moment was that the non-white males'
were least likely to become principals in the response pool'
than the rest of their counterparts.'
And we have to figure out why.
As far as gender balance in leadership,'
most people answered that their firms'
were perceived as mostly male.
And, again, that is compounded by the fact'
that there has been this evolutionary process of women'
going into architecture and the problems'
and the hurdles of staying.
But we also find that most of the leaders in architecture'
that are women are in small firms or practices,'
so starting their own firms.
And in the large firms, there is a 7% disconnect'
between the likelihood of men being more likely to be'
principals than women.
Early career trajectories and perceptions, so this'
is important to all of you who will be new grads pretty soon.'
The things that were judged as more positive outlooks'
were the workload, the career optimism,'
and work life flexibility.
In terms of more negative was perceptions were more'
the meaningfulness of the work, the involvement'
in decision making, the overall energy for the projects'
that they were involved in, and the likelihood'
that they would stay in the firm that they were in.'
What we learned from people leaving'
was that most people that left the profession, men and women,'
were in that zero to five year range because of we'
believe the disconnect between what we're taught in school"
is important versus what is valued in practice.'
And then when we look at the office tasks of men and women'
in those zero to five years, we learn'
that females are more likely--
sorry, less likely to do the following-- firm operations,'
strategy planning and thinking, BIM design technology,'
or firm project standards.
They are more likely to take care of the housekeeping roles'
in the firm, which include office library management'
and office parties.
So don't take on the role of office party planner"
or social planner, please.
Just kidding.
If you want to do that, that's fine."
It's important too.
But also go for those other things'
that you normally don't get a chance to do."
Early career retention likelihood,'
so the ones that said that they're"
more likely to stay, again, had more access, one-on-one access'
to senior staff.
And they believed they knew what the performance evaluation'
criteria was, the pathway to advance up the ladder,'
if you will.
Those that didn't believe that they were going to stay"
didn't see a path forward.
They didn't see the performance evaluation criteria."
They didn't have any friendships at work."
There was no prep for new roles.
And even if their firm had evaluation criteria,'
they did not know what it was.
So you could see the effect of that.'
More men were likely to stay if they didn't know what the firm"
evaluation criteria were even if they had something written'
down, right?
So not only is it good to have performance evaluation'
criteria, you have to tell everybody'
for those practitioners out there and the firm leaders.'
Value of licensure, so we get back'
to the question of the value proposition of why'
it's important or do we even think it's important."
The top answers of why people thought licensure was important'
was the ability to call themselves'
an architect, the ability to practice independently,'
and the heightened sense of professional standing.'
The challenges and obstacles of licensure'
are what we know today-- long hours, high cost, lack'
of rewards, difficulty with the actual process, et cetera.'
And then the family and the life gets in the way.'
So NCARB has been a great partner'
in realizing these challenges with us'
and then trying to solve for them.'
They are providing more help and advisement'
in how to get licensed and also the value proposition.'
Firms are continuing by giving incentives for licensure,'
whether it's a salary uptick or it's"
supporting the paying of the exam, et cetera, et cetera.'
Because ultimately it values the firm in lower insurance rates'
and being able to, you know, market different project types'
and get more responsible people into senior positions.'
Salary by licensure, those that were licensed'
made more than their non-licensed counterparts.'
So if you do decide to go into practice,'
try to get licensed right away.
Find a cohort group to support you to do that.'
The next one is shift into work life flexibility and work life'
challenges.
When asked the question, I have time to pursue interests'
outside of work, the people that answered yes,'
again, believed that their day-to-day work was aligned'
with their career goals and that the firm leaders actually'
took time off too.
They're walking the talk.
They weren't just saying, yeah, there's a policy there"
for work life flex.
They are taking the two weeks off, et cetera'
to refresh and re-energize.
Those that didn't believe they had enough time,"
didn't know what the criteria were"
for performance evaluation, they worked more than 44 hours'
a week.
And there was no work life flex policies in their firms.'
The other interesting thing is if people'
did take a hit in their--
where did they take it in their personal'
or their professional side of their lives?'
Most people, as you could see from the astounding number,'
took the hit on their personal lives.'
So whether it was schedule conflicts, poor health,'
neglected duties, or relationships crumbling,'
that took priority, unfortunately,'
over turning down opportunities or leaving a job, et cetera.'
When asked if people had ever been a month away'
from architecture or took a leave of absence, a break,'
most people said that they had never taken a career break.'
But surprisingly, if they had the opportunity'
to take that career break, would they?'
And a lot of people said yes, but I haven't asked."
So this goes back to talent retention and the fact'
that we don't value taking a career break."
We don't value the leave of absence."
But if it means losing somebody who's been there for 10 years,"
and the fact that if you had to replace them'
it would cost 2.5 to 3 times their salary to replace them,'
that is a value proposition.
Because with that, institutional knowledge'
also goes out the door.
Shifting gears to child care responsibility'
and caregiving in this lens, women in our response support'
tended to do more of the caregiving'
as a primary caregiver.
The stigma of who is winning the bread'
and who is giving the care is still there'
in parallel to society.
And even the time that people take off'
for the birth of their child--
one to three days on the median for men and three months'
for women.
And we see this impacting the salaries, of course.'
This is parallel to a study dubbed the daddy bonus'
and the mother penalty.
So who makes the most?
The male parent.
Then the non-parent male and then the non-parent female.'
But guess who is making the least?'
It's the mothers.
And then we shift gears again.
So that was a lot of depressing information, I know.'
We're going to shift gears into what are we"
going to do about it.
OK, so when people ask, why does equity'
matter as a conversation in practice and representation'
and why does it matter in design,'
we start off with the premise that the US census reports'
that by 2045, the majority population in the US'
will be an aggregate of minority race ethnicity representations.'
And why is that important?
That is a frightening reality for some people who'
happen to be in the majority, but is also'
an exciting opportunity to see what the potential is'
of diverse thinking and diverse backgrounds in our workforce.'
And it starts with 2025 is the predictor'
for the majority of college applicants, college student'
applicants, which I'm sure you're seeing"
in your own demographic here.
So in the economy it matters.
Again, if we had the potential of,'
if we had minimized barriers and maximized potential for success'
for everyone, we would be able to propel'
the economy to a point where we haven't imagined before."
As it relates to health and life expectancy,'
the shocking thing is that you could be living within a 10'
mile radius and potentially you would'
be living nine years less in a different area that'
has poor access to fresh air and clean air and clean water'
than the people that were fortunate and more'
privileged enough to live in a different area code within 10'
miles.
We see equity mattering as a potential for dignity'
and respect and basic human needs, the idea'
that people who are transgender are denied the dignity'
and respect of basic human needs is something'
that we have a potential to influence as designers.'
We're seeing that more and more with our clients,"
particularly in higher ed, but in the public sector as well,'
of we need the all-gender restroom'
and we don't want just the one room on the side checking"
the box of all-gender restrooms.
So how can we design differently to maintain'
dignity and respect?
Equity applies also to designing places for working mothers'
and also families in public.
So what is deemed uncomfortable and awkward'
as women breastfeeding in public or diaper'
changing in public or the fact that there's kids loitering"
and do not loiter or the safety of those around us'
that are older and more fragile.
Where is the place in society that'
is welcoming and inclusive and safe for all those people?'
And finally, another alumni of the GSD, Deanna Van Buren'
is doing some amazing work with the Design Justice Advocacy'
and designing places that offer dignity'
and respect and rehabilitation.
So I went to it.
When I was speaking at TEDx Philadelphia,'
there was a gentleman by the name of Jessie Crimes.'
Yes, Crimes was his last name.
And he was an artist, but also a former incarcerated'
in the system.
And what he observed as an artist was saying'
that the most violent thing that he experienced during his time'
in prison weren't other prisoners,"
it wasn't the law enforcement, it was the walls."
And that was this shocking aha moment for me'
about the humanity-- the irony that we'
are supposed to be designing humane spaces'
and yet we are denying this vital population access to air'
and views and light of day and what that'
does to their mental health.
We hear that, but we don't realize the damage"
that it's actually doing.
So she's doing amazing work there"
with getting design and access to better'
places for those populations.
Why equity matters for teaching the next generation, so'
Michael Ford who is a professor in the Midwest, in Michigan,'
he founded this project called Hip Hop Architecture.'
And he wrote a book about how hip hop is actually'
very heavily related to architecture and the fact'
that a lot of the projects that were built in Chicago'
and out of that era, again, were not humane'
and were damaging to the societies and the culture'
of the people growing up in those areas with the violence.'
And as an antithesis to that, he is'
using hip hop as a vernacular language for the children'
to expose them to architecture and the power of design.'
And he is being sponsored by Autodesk.'
And he's been around talking about it."
But he's also had the architecture camps"
and the exposure on the Today Show.'
And it's taking off.
These kids who never get exposure to design,'
access to design thinking, or the power'
that they can make a difference are learning'
what architecture is all about.
And then, finally, our own movement'
of not just having the survey but also being active'
and activists, we gather for a symposium'
where 250 people come from all over not'
only the US, but the world we heard.'
We had Justine Clark from Parlour'
in Australia last time around.
And as you can see, it is more women than men.'
But we are getting more men to come to the event.'
Because equity is not just for women or people of color.'
Equity is for everyone.
And it affects everyone in more ways than you can imagine.'
We have panelists talking about what's happening in firms."
Again, we need firm leaders to adopt these practices.'
We need them to believe that it's not just a business case,"
it's not just adding another dollar value,"
it's adding value to, ultimately, what"
we do in our work for society.
And then we ask people to commit to making change.'
And I ask that of all of you.
Of course, we can complain about all the problems'
we have as architects and the fact'
that we're currently not satisfied"
with the way they are.
But the only way we can make--
you can't be-- you can't be part--"
sorry, you can't-- you're part of the problem if you're not"
part of the solution.
So I ask each one of you to think about deeply what you're"
passionate about and to contribute to the movement,'
to grab your fork and eat that whale with us.'
We took cards from the Eames House of Cards.'
And that was one of the activities'
we did where we all wrote down what'
our personal commit commitments were'
and we stacked them up like a house of cards,'
aggregating the collective energy of the movement.'
And then the hackathon, which is coming up,'
our fourth hackathon in New York City'
is an idea about using design thinking, this Silicon Valley'
phenomenon.
The D-school is kind of championing'
this idea, a different idea about design, which is yes and.'
It's not putting people down.
It's not saying my idea is better than yours."
It's building upon.
It's improv.
It's innovation.
It's incubation.
And it's saying yes and what else?"
What can we do better?
How can we do things that solve the problems that we're"
facing that imminently we believe'
we don't have a solution to?
So a group of strangers for four hours locked in a room'
together, they become lifelong friends.'
And they're all from diverse backgrounds, different genders"
identities, different parts of the US,'
different race and ethnicities.
And it was an amazing experience.'
And I encourage you to come to New York'
this year because we're going to do it again."
And we had venture capitalists who'
said, hey, we should amplify this and support the winning'
idea.
So we're still trying to get funding to be able to do that."
Finally, I leave you with some lessons learned.'
How do we make change?
So firstly, the metrics.
Support the survey.
If you can, take the survey.
It's coming out in three weeks.
Share the findings.
Share the report.
Share the video.
Measure up.
If you are working in a firm or you're"
going to be working in a firm, bring it there and say, hey,'
how do we compare to this?
This is the safest way you can to say'
there's something wrong here, it's not your fault,"
but in a way, this is something that we can all'
work on together and create positive change.'
And then once you've reassessed it, if it's not working,"
make those changes and go at it again.'
And as far as meeting goes, how do'
we make deeper connections not only as a cohort of mentors'
and sponsors and champions, but how do we make a greater'
connection to our communities?
And it seems like a lot to ask of work life balance'
already of having work and careers,'
but also being a member, an active member and a citizen'
of your community.
But that's also the pathway to job creation"
and ideating what's missing in my community"
and how can we raise money and get that project built.'
And, therefore, you become part of that client base.'
I'm doing that right now with our Board of Ed"
and the new schools that are being designed, being'
that design review to make sure that we'
do get good design in the outcome'
because we're spending our tax dollars"
and we want to be careful with that.'
Embrace technology, I don't need to tell you all that."
I usually tell that to the practitioners'
who are technology tourists, digital tourists, if you will,'
not digital natives.
And the way we connect with each other is on social media,'
through Twitter, through Facebook, through LinkedIn.'
It's not just people are adverse to that because they think,"
oh, somebody is going to troll me'
and my life is going to end poorly because of that,'
I'll be terrorized.
But is actually a way that we can empower each other'
and building that strength in numbers,'
building that stronger network of champions'
to support each other.
Seek, be, cultivate mentors.
So not only do you want lots of mentors,'
you want to be the mentor.
And then you want to teach the people that you'
mentor to pass it forward.
Because that's the only way we're"
going to get through this together.'
Engage with your communities and then build your tribe.'
Again, you might not find like-minded people around you'
immediately when you go into practice,'
but you will find them eventually'
and especially if you're looking for them intentionally"
and stick with them.
Finally, there is a happy ending to my story-- sorry,'
I keep doing that--
of hitting a glass ceiling, if you will,'
and the caregiving challenges.
And I found a firm.
Finding the right fit, it was a long journey.'
But I found a firm in SmithGroupJJR who not only--'
I didn't realize at the time because they took"
a year of trying to recruit me.
And I kept saying, not now, not now, I'm too busy,"
I'm too busy.
But slowly realizing that they did'
have values that aligned with my own,'
that they weren't just spouting off that yes, we're diverse,"
but they were actually doing something about it.'
So they hired me to head up their equity, diversity,'
and inclusion program, but also to practice architecture'
in the way that we feel is building value.'
So these are just some images of us sharing that out'
loud and also that there are women leaders who'
are mothers in the San Francisco office and all over the US.'
So, you know, more women in leadership roles'
is something that is, again, proof in the pudding'
that we're making progress.
And that was something that led me ultimately'
to my decision to move.
What's next?
So, again, I mentioned the architecture survey,'
the national conference in New York,'
which is relatively close to here.'
And we're doing a bunch of workshops, a design justice"
workshop at Grace Farms Foundation.'
If you haven't had a chance to visit Grace Farms,"
highly recommended.
They're talking about justice as well as art, community,"
sustainability, and spirituality.'
The hackathon and also another workshop'
called Architects as Catalysts for Social Change.'
Again, connecting the meaningful work to your day-to-day work'
is so important.
And finally, the fifth symposium.'
So last week was the Women's March."
How many of you were able to attend?'
It's OK you didn't.
I found it, the first time that I'
asked my daughter to go with me, a future activist in the works.'
There's a fork in the road where we are today."
We can choose fear or we can choose hope.'
And I hope that we all choose hope together.'
Today is the first day of the rest of your life.'
That is a deep thought, existential thing'
I'm going to leave you with in thinking,"
what will you do with the rest of your life'
to make change and profound impact?'
And I thank you all for coming.
[applause]
Hi.
I'm Sarah Kendricks, a 2018 candidate"
for a master in architecture and past co-chair'
of Women in Design.
And we're going to have a few minutes to think Rosa"
for joining us and take some questions.'
If it's all right, I will open up the floor"
and then hand over to all of you to ask Rosa.'
So thank you so much for that incredible talk.'
At the GSD, we are thrilled to currently have'
two female co-chair-- two female department chairs.'
But we've still never had a dean that's female."
And our faculty is 70% men and 92% men and white ladies.'
What do you think the GSD administration can'
be doing to better advance equity within the school'
as well as for the future careers of its graduates?'
That's too easy.
I just want it on record.
Hint, hire more women to be faculty members.'
Hire more people of color.
Intersectionality, right?
Not just those binaries, people of all different backgrounds.'
Because we can't be thinking diversely"
if we don't have that diverse representation in the people"
that are doing the teaching.
It doesn't mean that a white male couldn't"
be a diverse thinker and teach the diverse skill set, but,'
again--
and if you don't see it, ask for it."
Somebody at Georgia Tech who was in San Francisco,'
is a grad student there and she brought'
that up to my attention, I said, well,'
what are you going to do about it, right?'
I can't do anything about it.
What are you going to do about it?'
So she's putting together a petition."
She's getting the local AIA chapters involved"
in asking that question.
Thank you.
From the audience?
Here.
I was wondering when people take your survey'
and they are not necessarily architects,'
how do you deal with that data?
How do you represent it?
I am myself a landscape architect.'
And your data is very interesting,'
but I'm not exactly sure how that reflects how this all"
pans out in my profession.
Sure.
There is a landscape architecture survey.'
There is a structural engineering survey'
as well that's paralleled and built on ours."
But just because there would be too much information,'
we do ask that the cutoff point, if you will,'
is did you go to architecture school'
and did you graduate from an accredited program?'
And that's kind of all we need.
You could currently be practicing or not.'
But that's kind of the defining line so that we don't go crazy,"
you know, with these variants.
Right, with information overload.'
Yeah, but there is an ASLA survey'
that you could be involved in or amplifying.'
Another question?
Hi, thank you.
It's kind of building on that one."
I'm curious-- if you could--
I'm sure you've looked.
If you could describe to us a little bit'
about how architecture compares to other professional fields.'
Yes, I don't have that slide with me right now."
But we fare, we fare worse than doctors and lawyers.'
We fare better than engineers and contractors.'
Does that help?
Yeah, no, I'm just curious--
I can follow up and send you the slide.'
--if there's, like, if you've identified things that are"
particularly sticky or challenging about architecture'
for, you know--
for women and equity issues, yeah--'
than in other professions.
We didn't do any survey analysis on that"
because we didn't ask respondents"
of other professions.
But we know from cross comparison'
that it is the pay issue that's the biggest challenge, again,"
related to even education.
You think that we would make more than some educators,'
but because of the different tracks, if you will, like,'
for like, we don't make more than them."
If you count the time off, if you will,'
if they worked throughout the year,'
they would be making more than we would'
in the years of experience.
Yes.
Hi.
Thanks for your talk.
And I guess I was wondering, similar'
along the lines like in other fields,'
like, what sort of significant changes'
can we make to the kind of larger system of players that'
are involved in architecture?
Because, you know, developers, lawyers, politicians,'
architects are all sort of implicated still'
in the sort of ongoing destruction of the environment'
and also indigenous, I mean, indigenous lands.'
So like, I'm wondering, like, what sort of--"
We're at the cusp of that right now."
So the design justice advocacy is'
starting to connect all the different people related'
to these aspects of--
highly recommend if you're interested in that to come"
to the design justice workshop.
Because it's looking not only at the immediacy of the outcomes"
of design justice in the built environment,'
but where do our materials come from,'
who is building our buildings?
Is it done with fair wage?
Is it done with materials that are in sweatshop factories,'
et cetera, et cetera?
And it's bringing that awareness."
It's a difficult conversation.
And we're not going to solve it tomorrow."
But we are starting to talk about it, right?'
I think we have time for one more question.'
Yeah.
Ask an easy question please.
Well, it's going to be a fun question."
OK.
So I work with women who are trying'
to make it into leadership.
And a question I get asked is, should I'
learn how to play golf because it seems like that's"
where everything happens?
And I suspect that there's another side of the question,"
which is that if you are a person in power,'
and that might mean that you're likely to be a white male,"
there are things that you might want to learn to do or operate'
differently in order to maybe meet the people who are'
learning to play golf halfway.
So I guess the question for you is for people in power,'
specifically maybe white men who find themselves'
in roles of power, is there one or two or three things'
that you would suggest that if they want to be allies'
they can do to really be proactive allies'
and to support rising people of color and women'
in their practices?
So there are some suggestions, again,'
anecdotally about the events that are more inclusive, right?'
So having lunches or rotating between lunches and happy'
hours, right, so that you can get more of a mix of people.'
And if you take a group out to dinner,'
make sure you do a rotation, right, so that you're not just"
taking the same group.
That's easy access because they're around you"
and you work with that group on projects.'
And the golfing thing is a tough one because I don't know."
Some people like to play golf, right?'
And that's fine and good.
But there are other activities that are not gender-specific,'
or race, ethnicity.
What are those universal activities'
that people like to do?
I'll name a silly one, karaoke.
I was just talking to Peter about that.'
Even if you don't like--
or even if you think you can't sing,"
I think everybody secretly sings in the shower, right,'
or in your mind.
And music has such a powerful impact on memory and place.'
And I think if you find those common threads that are'
universal-- even food, right?
And then experience food in different ways'
and not just the same old, same old,'
but try to encourage cultural exploration'
through these universal mediums.
Is that helpful?
Well-- that's all, right?
Oh, thank you.
Yes.
Thank you so much for coming.
I want to say a special thank you and shout out'
to all the male presenting folks in the audience tonight.'
Thank you for being here.
And Rosa, thank you so much for that wonderful talk.'
Oh, yes.
Maybe we can give Rosa another round of applause.'
[applause]
