Good evening.
I take great pleasure to welcome tonight's speaker,"
Anna Puigjaner.
Anna's an architect, editor, researcher, curator, mostly"
traveler.
When she lights, she is also co-founder of a studio'
in Barcelona called MAIO.
Anna's spent a lot of time imagining"
a future in which housing is more specifically suited'
to the different needs of its inhabitants,'
and especially the idea that sometimes that'
means not having a kitchen.
Her project that she entitled Kitchenless,'
received the Wheelwright Prize in 2016,'
with an endowment of $100,000 for research.'
And that's the reason she's never at home."
Researching internationally existing models'
of communal habitation.
Let me say a little bit about the Wheelwright Prize.'
It originated at Harvard, in the Department of Architecture,'
as the Arthur C Wheelwright Traveling Fellowship.'
Now, the title is important.
This is 1935.
It was basically conceptualized on the model of the Beaux-Arts'
Grand Tour, of the European Grand Tour,'
where, no matter what your education,'
no matter where your education, you'
couldn't be a properly educated architect until you"
had gone to Rome, Greece, and seen all the ancient monuments.'
And the prize, of course, was 1935,'
was a time when Americans, very few Americans,'
traveled internationally.
And it was explicitly in order to make that travel possible.'
I'll just mention a few of the early fellows."
Paul Rudolph, Elliot Noyses, William Worcester, IM Pei.'
There are many of that caliber.
In 2013, Mohsen Mostafavi opened the prize'
to early career architects worldwide.'
Previously, it had been only Harvard alums.'
Now the rule is, the sole eligibility requirement'
is that applicants must have received'
a professionally accredited architecture degree'
in the previous 15 years.
I'm just saying, many eligible people in the room."
As I said, though, when Anna won the prize,'
it set her off on a travel schedule'
that I will let her tell and talk about tonight.'
When she does, every now and then, light like a flying bird,'
her work has been published, and MAIO's work"
has been published in magazines like DOMUS, Plot, Frame,'
DETAIL.
The work was exhibited in the Venice Biennale,'
in the Chicago Architectural Biennial.'
It's been exhibited at storefront and other locations."
She's taught many, many places.
The firm, MAIO, is in Barcelona, in the Gracia--'
it's called that, yeah?--
District.
Well, I don't know if you have time to show it."
It's a very interesting district."
It started in the time right when she won the prize.'
They had taken on workers from other businesses'
to make a collective partly, if I understand'
for economic reasons, partly for theoretical reasons, let's say."
By 2016, when they could actually'
afford to now have a studio alone,'
they actually decided that they were no longer compelled'
to have a studio alone.
So already this idea of cooperation'
is a kind of kitchenless office in its own way.'
Welcome, Anna Puigjaner.
Thank you very much, Michael, for such nice introduction.'
And thank you everyone for being here tonight.'
As you may imagine, tonight is quite a special moment for me,'
because I'm closing two years of traveling"
that have been quite intense.
So two years ago, when I received the call'
about the Wheelwright Prize, Mohsen Mostafavi'
mentioned that I was going to be a life--'
that it was going to be a life changing thing.'
And he couldn't have been righter."
These last two years have been probably the most intense ones'
in my life, having a strong impact'
in both the professional and the personal level.'
So I cannot be more thankful to the jury,'
that at that moment two years ago considered my proposal'
of value, and that they have offered me this opportunity.'
So thank you, Mohsen Mostafavi, Michael Hays, Eva Franch,'
Jeannie Kim, Kiel Moe, Rafael Moneo, and Benjamin Prosky.'
And of course, thanks to Harvard GSD and the Arthur Wheelwright'
Traveling Fellowship itself.
Tonight, as you will see, we will see a lot of kitchens'
and a lot of food.
So my apologies, if you haven't had dinner."
Because that's what mainly I've been"
doing for the last two years.
But before going to the cooking world,'
let me introduce the origins and aim of this research.'
When Rem Koolhaas published his famous book, Delirious New'
York, in 1978 40 years ago, he pictured'
a city in New York defined by a set of big buildings on a grid.'
The famous grid created in 1811, thanks to the Commissioners'"
Plans that was actually showed inside the flap of the book.'
In Koolhaas' imaginary, buildings"
enclose as envelopes a whole world in themselves.'
And the [inaudible] is just the base'
that allows those extraordinary worlds to happen.'
In fact, several projects developed'
by Koolhaas and his colleagues at OMA appear in the book.'
Among others, this one, the City of the Captive Globe project,'
that shows, again, the [inaudible] uniform grid'
that supports a set of buildings representing'
a beautiful catalog of OMA self-proclaimed influences.'
As, for instance, we can see here,'
there is Le Corbu, Lissitzky, over here.'
So they saw New York as an incubator that'
holds an extraordinary set of reference, extraordinary pieces'
as a collection.
A type of world, a type of reality,'
where the building, specifically the skyscraper,'
defines the protagonist to the point'
that it is treated as [inaudible] shown'
as characters, as persons themselves,'
as people themselves.
Sorry.
So like everyone, I got fascinated'
by these extraordinary collections of skyscrapers,'
and especially captured my attention the Waldorf-Astoria,'
especially because the Waldorf-Astoria holds'
a set of apartments that lack of kitchens.'
So around 10 years ago, I started researching about them.'
I was fascinated, as Koolhaas was, with all the stories.'
You see the kitchenless floor open.'
With all the stories embedded in that building.'
The people that live in it, its type'
of organization, its structure.
It was kind of a gossiping thing, also a bit vicious.'
To my surprise, when I try to understand the origin'
of this kitchenless typology.
I discovered that New York was filled--'
I discovered that New York was filled at that time'
by similar apartments, that the Waldorf-Astoria was'
extraordinary because it was extremely luxurious,'
but that actually that typology, the life without kitchens,'
and to have all those services instead,'
it was quite ordinary, quite common.'
There was a time in New York when the house was'
understood as an open system.
It was designed not as a single entity, but as'
a set of connected fragments, that could'
change depending on the need.
So it was systemic.
The space was flexible and adaptable [inaudible],,'
and expanded also by means of collective rooms'
and domestic services.
The kitchen was optional, as well as the rest of the rooms,'
and sometimes it was left apart, kitchenless.'
The story of this New York kitchenless'
typology dates back to the economic depression'
that followed the American Civil War in 1865.'
At that moment, new architectural solutions'
for the middle class appear, that'
not only reduce significantly the cost of living,'
but also allow the elimination of housekeeping annoyances.'
There were all kinds of apartments,'
and all kinds of sizes as well, all of them'
promoted by the private sector.
And we could find small cases as this one,'
with two rooms and a bathroom, to extremely large ones,'
with two apartments per floor plan and no kitchen.'
Due to the commercial aim, it was highly appreciated'
that such buildings could offer not only a wider spectrum'
of shared spaces and shared services,'
but also flexible sized apartments.'
Not only to offer good services for the inhabitants,'
but also to satisfy a bigger demand'
and accommodate a wider social range.'
In New York, kitchenless houses--'
I'm sorry.
Sorry.
So despite being promoted by the private sector, also'
these collective houses had quite a social role.'
Most of the rooms were open to the public,'
becoming true social condensers.
So thanks to the externalization of the kitchen'
and other domestic spaces, the typology'
blurred the traditional limits between the public'
and the private sphere, between the domestic and the urban.'
And thanks to its flexibility and [? sharing, ?] it'
was able to shrink radically housekeeping cost, waste,'
and labor.
So if Koolhaas saw New York as a city defined'
by big skyscrapers, for me, New York was a city,'
and is a city defined by a fragmented, flexible,'
and interconnected reality, where the kitchen played'
an important role to allow this flexibility to happen.'
And this way of looking at things'
is also a condition of our time, a way'
of seeing our closed reality from'
a contemporarily perspective.
This image was captured by our attention years ago by the fact'
that the domestic scene and interior was placed'
in a provocative manner in the middle of the landscape,'
raising questions regarding the limits within inside'
and outside, questions regarding what'
domesticity meant at that time.
Nowadays, this exact image struck us'
not only by that but also by the fact, by other things.'
So a decade ago, a family would still gather around the TV.'
Nowadays, not only has the image and identity of the family'
has radically changed, but also a new social reality'
is engaging with the atomization of devices'
and increasing demand on services.'
The TV has lost definitely its central space in the house.'
And therefore, it has modified behaviors and the way'
we use our homes and our cities at large.'
Now we not only watch TV in the living room.'
We watch TV in the bedroom, and even in the city itself,'
in the subway.
Uses are superimposed, overlapping,'
and the way in which we use the space becomes increasingly more'
fragmented, as it happened in the 19th century in New York.'
More fragile, and also more ephemeral,'
but at the same time, more interconnected.'
So when two years ago, I proposed this project'
for the Wheelwright Prize, my intention,'
my initial intention was actually what I said.'
It was to turn visible the contemporary cases'
of collective kitchens, and through that'
to expose that shared kitchens have'
deeper political, economical circumstances.'
However, my interest on collective kitchens'
goes beyond that.
As it happened in 19th century New York,'
I consider that the kitchen can be once again'
an architectural tool to transgress and redefine'
pre-established social and spatial conditions.'
Specifically, domestic conditions, of course,'
in relation to gender, labor, housekeeping, and waste.'
And that in order to answer to our contemporary network,'
ephemeral and mobile reality.
In order to unveil this, during these last two years,'
I have done five travels, visiting eight countries,'
researching with a group of international, marvelous'
people--
they might be watching now--
that I have traveled with, and that have traveled with me,'
allowing me to understand better their culture and be super,'
super nice with me.
So I really have to thank Laura [? campagne, ?]'
[? ada madiata, ?] [inaudible],, [inaudible],, Yuki Masamoto,'
[? gizem ?] Morales, [? nori ?] Artigosa, and Mikako Oshima.'
And of course, my partners at MAIO have allowed to do this.'
So thanks to Guillermo Lopez, Maria Charneco,'
and Alfredo Lerida.
So alongside with these five travels to Senegal, Bangkok,'
Singapore, Montreal, Mexico, Tokyo,'
and China, and [inaudible] sorry, Lima, as so'
alongside with these travels, thanks to the visibility'
of the award, I have been invited'
to talk about the research in 26 places in the last two years.'
And I taught three workshops.
So if you add all that to the sum of my trip,'
I was quite [? scared. ?] So it's like 170,000 miles."
So it's like I did seven times the world tour."
And yes, I'm tired.
So I'm going to start with my last trip."
40 years ago in Lima, started a system'
of collective cooking that has been'
able during these last decades to not only reduce housekeeping'
costs, but also to provide access to food,'
as well as has been able to empower women'
in Peruvian society.
Since its origin, these domestic organizations'
have been community political agencies'
that go beyond the act of cooking and eating.'
A radical system that blurs not only'
the limits between private and public,'
between family structures and domestic worlds, between labor'
and housekeeping, but also act as a place for neighborhood'
management, connected directly with municipal institutions'
and larger political agencies.
The first collective canteens were born at the end of 1970s.'
So exactly around 1978, from grassroots movements.'
And it was a period in Lima of great social mobilization'
and politicization, that ultimately brought down'
the military regime.
Between 1978 in 1979, the National Teachers Union, SUTEP,'
occupied local schools as they pressed for better wages.'
In solidarity with the strikers, women from the communities'
began to prepare collective pots,'
as they called it, of food to feed the strikers.'
For weeks, schools became places of political discussion'
about working conditions, housing, and communities.'
Many women who were leaving these collective pots'
participated in political meetings,'
which encouraged to them to start women's organizations"
focused on providing food for their families and communities'
in a wider sense.
The first one appeared in Las Comas in El Agustino'
neighborhood, and used a group between 20 and 40 women'
with the aim to provide, as I was saying,'
food for the community on a daily basis.'
In front of the economic and social instability,'
these collective kitchens offered security and stability.'
So the typology expanded really fast.'
It not only happened in Lima, but happened and is still'
happening all over Peru.
[inaudible] it expanded in the '80s, and their impact"
has been quite large.
So suddenly they gained quite a political agency.'
What the started around a domestic space, a kitchen,'
gained autonomy and entity, to the point'
that their social relevance and, consequentially,'
political power was radically punished'
during the years of the terrorist group, the Shining'
Path.
When many attacks happened against these women'
and against these collective kitchens, many of them'
were killed.
And among them, I wanted to put her image.'
Among them, the activist Maria Elena Moyano,'
who was murdered in 1992 by the terrorist group,'
and provoked a huge social consternation due to that.'
Of course, I'm selecting Maria Elena Moyano"
because she was one of the leaders of the women groups,'
specifically the La Federacion Popular de Las Mujeres de Villa'
El Salvador, FEPOMUVES, that you will see that it comes'
afterwards in another story.
So sorry.
Excuse me.
What is curious is actually that,'
despite the political imagination that'
has been raised during these last decades'
about these collective Kitchens being political,'
if you ask nowadays their members'
about their political agency, most of them,'
they're going to deny that.
They are going to say they are quite apolitical.'
They consider themselves just a grassroots movement,'
that wants not to be linked with any political party.'
However, these radical acts that I was mentioning before'
prove that actually they're quite totally the opposite,"
quite political.
And just by the fact that they have a strong social impact'
and have a strong social influence on Peruvian society.'
So after several governments and different state policies,'
comedores populares are still quite active in Lima,'
providing food to around 1 million people daily.'
And considering that, depending on the cases,'
you can tell that between half million and 1 million.'
But considering that the population of Lima'
is eight million a half, one million is quite a lot.'
And in comedores populares, there more than 100,000 women'
cooking daily for the community.
So as I was mentioning, the phenomenon'
has not only happened in Lima, but has also'
happened in the whole of Peru.
The government registered 16,461 collective kitchens in 2017.'
And actually, they confess that that might be the half of it.'
So just the half of the reality is under control'
of the government.
For those that don't know Lima, let me explain a bit."
So Lima is a hilly city.
The so-called cerros, like these little [? mountains, ?]'
characterize the urban landscape,'
and are the areas where most of these kitchens are placed.'
Los cerros were and still are massively occupied'
after the 1950s, due to large migrations of rural population'
to the city.
In 1960, the population of Lima was around two million.'
Nowadays, as I was mentioning, it's around 8 million a half."
So the city expanded enormously during these last decades.'
And this population is settled in an informal manner,'
occupying the hills due to a lack of an infrastructure'
and urban planning.
In one of the oldest settlements is'
placed one of the first collective canteen'
kitchens that is still working nowadays.'
Situated in El Augustino, [spanish]'
is a small infrastructure run by 15 women, which'
are self-organized and cook once a week,'
serving around 100 meals daily from Monday to Saturday.'
The cost of the meal is around 4 soles, 4 soles and a half.'
So to picture that, it's around half"
of the price of a regular daily menu.'
They can offer menus for such a low price'
thanks to a good wholesale organization'
and efficient collective cooking,'
reducing waste and [? consumes. ?] Around 50'
of them, as I was mentioning, are under the control'
of the government.
And they receive monthly nonperishable foods.'
Most of the Kitchens operate in a similar manner.'
And most of them, as this one, occupy--'
as this one-- sorry-- occupy pre-existent houses.'
So they occupy domestic infrastructures,'
converting any private domestic space'
into a collective one for the welfare of the community.'
This actually was an old living room before.'
Just a few of them have been able to receive'
governmental help to raise up new buildings.'
Cases as this one, the [spanish] also in El Agustino.'
Or La Balanza placed in--
La Balanza, placed in Comas, are quite an exception.'
As you see, La Balanza, it's really well-designed."
It was designed by Javier [? vera, ?] [? luciano ?]'
[? valez, ?] and [inaudible] among others.'
So there were architects involved.'
Apart from the kitchen, it incorporates other spaces'
for the community as a study room.'
As a study room, as well as a playground,'
and a room for [inaudible].
So La Balanza definitely has become a social condenser,'
and its [? important ?] to increase control and preserve'
the human quality of its actual context.'
So kitchens in La Balanza show us'
the relevance of the act, of the act of turning something'
domestic into something public, not only'
for the welfare of the community at large,'
but as I mentioned before, essential for the empowerment'
of women, which mostly lack enough access'
to essential things, as labor, education, nutrition,'
and social security, among other things, other basic needs.'
The lady in the picture is Marta Vera.'
Actually, apart from running this small store,'
she runs a small company with 30 employees that produce bread,'
boiled eggs, milks for public schools.'
They prepare around 11,000 servings a week.'
You have to imagine that when I arrived,'
I was looking for a company, like a big enterprise.'
And then I encountered these women behind those bars,'
and I asked for her, and she would answer, yes, here I am.'
And I was definitely shocked by the fact'
that behind that, she was there, the owner.'
And behind those bars, there's a huge company"
that produces all this food for the public schools.'
So the story of Marta Vera is quite interesting.'
She started cooking in a collective kitchen,'
as many other women.
She did not finish her studies.
And due to her economic situation,'
the kitchen offered her a solution to access to food'
and decreased cost, home cost.
Thanks to the kitchen, she started'
to be involved in grassroots movements'
and political associations, becoming'
a leader of her association, and later'
allowing her to start her own baking business.'
Everything started in 1987, when US Agency for International'
Development--
so the US was involved-- started to ship wheat to Peru.'
So the US wheat was distributed through NGOs'
to the different collective kitchens.'
It emerged then the idea to start'
a system of bakeries that could produce bread for all of them.'
At the beginning, in 1990, there were 26 bakery businesses.'
But after USAID, [? usaid, ?] as they'
call it, stopped sending wheat, they'
were forced to change their economic business system.'
And progressively, without the aid, most of them'
had to close and disappear.
It's quite interesting.
Sorry.
It's quite interesting, because nowadays, actually,"
the government of Peru is debating a regulation'
to encourage among these women to start their own businesses.'
And cases as this one show us how a shared kitchen can'
be also a place for economical production'
that goes beyond the act of baking,'
places that can turn and waste housekeeping labors'
into a wage [? won. ?]
Influenced by the Lima case, the government of Mexico City'
initiated in 2009 a social program'
to relieve financial pressures that'
were put on the middle class due to the economic crisis of 2008,'
as you may imagine.
While soup kitchens and similar had been running for years,'
serving free meals to people with very limited resources,'
much of the population affected by the economic crisis'
either could not use them, because their economy situation'
was not that bad, or either they would not accept to use them.'
So the city thus decided to promote community kitchens run'
by a mixed management, half public, half private,'
with shared responsibilities to encourage community'
participation and promote citizen appropriation,'
all while making a significant impact'
with really low resources.
The city-backed collective lunch program, so-called comedores'
communitarios, is used daily by thousands'
of citizens in Mexico City.
The system is quite simple.
Any citizen with a room larger than has'
323 square feet in their house can'
apply to use this space as a community kitchen.'
If accepted in the program, the city'
will install an industrial kitchen,'
supply all kinds of cookware for industrial cooking,'
and deliver various nonperishable foods,'
as it happened in Peru, such as rice, beans, bi-weekly'
or monthly.
The people responsible for each kitchen in turn'
are expected to cook for the community'
and offer a daily menu in their homes.'
In the eight years since the program began,'
hundreds of houses in Mexico have'
been refurbished to accommodate daily meals,'
opening their living rooms to the public,'
and transforming private spaces into public ones.'
And yet the transformation of a home'
into a comedor communitario typical'
involves minor changes to the structure of the house itself.'
The communal dining room might be simply located,'
as here in a [? patio ?] [? cupboard unit. ?] Or as you'
will see in the future, in the next images, in even garages.'
I love these kind of images that show actually'
how the most private [inaudible] mixes with the most'
urban and collective reality.
So the residents of these homes can meet with neighbors'
during lunch hours.
The public and the private, the domestic'
and the urban co-exist.
This one, for instance, is a comedor communitario'
placed in a garage.
So they take out the car for a few hours,'
and they transform it, basically.'
So usually Mexico, a low cost menu,'
called popularly "comida corrida," costs about 80 pesos.'
And is generally comprised by beans, rice, some wheat'
tortillas, and a soup.
The menu in these comedores communitarios is similar.'
Yet, thanks to the government subsidy,'
can be sold for only 10 pesos, which is 1/8'
of the regular price of a menu.
Which is actually also enough to pay a minimum wage to those'
participating in the preparation of food maintaining and food'
preparation maintaining of the space.'
Sorry.
I could have the chance to get in touch with the government,'
and they actually facilitate me these maps,'
that they used to control.
They actually have this system of weekly controls.'
So the government, or one social worker,'
usually steps weekly into the kitchen,'
just to be sure that everything is OK.'
And when I received the map, I was really deeply impressed'
by the fact that in such a few years, less than 10 years--'
is started in 2009--
the city of Mexico looks like this nowadays.'
So there are hundreds of them.
And the list of demand, the waiting list is extremely long.'
The government just cannot afford to pay more'
nonperishable foods and social workers to control.'
So this is a typical lunch menu in one'
of the comedores communitarios.
So officially, food is served and must be consumed in situ.'
However, OK, it's Mexico.
So despite the law, these kitchens usually'
serve food not only in house, but also beyond,'
in order to increase their income'
and satisfy a larger demand.
So there's a huge system, a low tech system of deliveries"
that allow that to happen.
Like a retired lawyer picking up food'
for his family and his friends.
Also unemployed men that also help their neighbors'
to pick up the food because they couldn't pick it up"
during labor hours.
So many are family-run.
Others, however, employ outside personnel.'
Those who work in the kitchen do so for many different reasons.'
Some are there to support the community.'
So it's more ideological.
While others need the paycheck.
The kitchens are mainly managed by women, who in many cases'
are either housewives or were previously unemployed.'
However, like the Peruvian case, also a lot of men work in them.'
In Mexico, a wide social [? array ?]'
participates, eats, and cooks in collective kitchens.'
Not only the fact that male and female cook in an equal way,'
but also the fact that their place in diverse neighborhoods,'
as you saw in the map.
And that helped to turn these infrastructures'
to be more accessible and welcoming to anyone.'
We find cases as the small ones as we'
have seen placed in all houses to this one, that'
is Las Margaritas, that occupies an old sports center,'
and has been able to grow.
They offer, like, 400 meals a day, so it's quite large."
And apart from the cooking and services,'
they offer all kinds of services.'
Like doctor, classes.
And it's extremely well organized"
in order to allow that to happen with such a low budget.'
Classrooms for activities, small stores, psychology,'
tanatalogia, dentists.
I mean, all kinds.
It's really, really impressive.
And they even cultivate, thanks to a New Zealand ONG,'
they could manage to build up this green house.'
And they even cultivate their own products.'
So what has changed more than anything'
are the dynamics of the neighborhoods themselves.'
The community dining room becomes an extension'
of the adjacent houses.
The collective kitchen replaces and complements'
private kitchens that otherwise cease to be regularly used.'
Despite being a relatively quite new program, the daily routine'
of cooking for the community, eating, picking up things,'
the food, meeting in the dining room,'
has taken root quickly through the city.'
In fact, when you're actually entering one of those shared"
dining rooms, one feels that it's actually"
entering in a domestic space, despite knowing'
that those people don't live there."
The influence of the community kitchens'
extends well beyond the house in which it is located.'
And when looking at the map that I showed you before,'
all these collective kitchen rooms,'
it is evident that the impact goes far'
beyond a specific neighborhood.
And we're talking about, really, an urban network"
of collective participation.
Let me go back to Lima.
In 1990, a group of Canadian women'
traveled to Lima to visit comedores populares.'
At the time, there were ready collective kitchens'
in the area of Quebec.
And the similarity of both systems prompted the meeting.'
So it's not that one influenced the other."
It's just that both came out at the same moment,"
and they met, luckily.
The case of Quebec is also quite interesting.'
At the beginning of 1980, three women'
decided to cook collectively in order'
to reduce household costs at the end of the month.'
The initiative came from [? jacine juliette, ?]'
who is here in the picture.
Actually, I pictured her, and I could meet her'
in her actual business, Le Chic Resto'
Pop that operates as a restaurant for offering'
affordable and healthy inexpensive food.'
So at the end, she ended up working in relation with that.'
So [? jacine, ?] in the '80s, was a single mother."
She was struggling to handle not only with family expenses,'
but also to manage her job hours with housekeeping and family'
care timings.
So she proposed to her sister and a friend'
to start sharing to make the situation better, easier.'
And suddenly, thanks to a social worker,'
this domestic organization moved to a neighborhood association,'
opening the first neighborhood kitchen in 1986, the one'
that you see in the image called Hochelaga-Masionneuve.'
And the practice suddenly began to spread.'
There are already more than 100 collective kitchens operated.'
There were, at the end of the '80s, around 100."
And what was interesting, actually,'
is the consequences of the trip of Peru.'
The trip of Peru allowed them to become aware'
of the political power, which they were not before.'
And suddenly, the they started to organize.'
They started to be organized under a partnership called'
Regoupement des Cuisines Collectives du Quebec, that'
still nowadays operates as a manager'
and helping them to be networked.'
And what is interesting is actually'
that despite the similarity of the Peruvian'
and the Canadian, between both the Peruvian and the Canadian'
origin, through these last decades,'
these kitchens have evolved, defining'
large differences between them.
So the origin was quite similar, but nowadays, they'
operate radically different.
In Quebec, the collective kitchen'
is just used every 15 days.
That day, the kitchen admits and cooks'
in large quantities for taking home several portions.'
So the act of cooking is done collectively.'
Everyone participates actively.
The groups are small, about eight people.'
And they are run by a social worker, who'
organizes and controls the station in order'
to make it successful.
Being so small, the participation'
is always really intense.
I always cooked in these ones when I visit.'
You had to.
So everyone is equal.
Everyone cooks for eating.
Although the system is exemplary,'
maybe for this reason, for the fact that it's so well defined,"
so exemplary, the social impact of these Canadian collective'
kitchens is proportionately much smaller'
than those of Mexico or Lima.
Excessive preparation and the standardization'
makes a larger participation unviable,'
despite actually existing a big demand to participate.'
Collective processes entail the risk of excesses,'
[inaudible] and regulation, and the consequential exclusion'
of those who basically don't follow the rules,"
or don't fit into the standard.
Also, the fact that cooking happens not frequently,'
just every two weeks, hardly satisfies the amount of food'
and cooking .
Needed so cooking in these kitchens'
covers more than a nutritional and economical everyday need.'
They cover, actually, a social need.'
This is probably one of the largest ones,'
that they combine the collective kitchen'
with a restaurant, as well as other economical activities.'
So the kitchen is extremely large and industrial.'
So when you ask all the participants, when'
you ask most of the people participating'
in this organization, they answer'
that they do it to socialize, basically,'
to have a sense of belonging in a community,'
to form part of something.
So if in Lima and Mexico we draw conclusions'
about the capacity of collective kitchens to empower women,'
as well as their capacity to turn domestic cooking into paid'
labor, decreasing housekeeping costs'
and facilitating family care, Canada'
is illustrative of the capacity of these collective kitchens'
to establish social bonds.
And comparing them, I learned about the consequences'
of regulating, of excessive regulation,'
and of course of the different ways of regulating.'
This is collective kitchens in Canada.'
So regarding the importance of the aforementioned regulations,'
I could research the urban implications'
related to cooking [? revelations ?] visiting'
Bangkok and Singapore.
Maybe stressing the relation of politics and architecture'
is a twist, but nevertheless, it remains'
interesting to analyze the ethics of the regulations'
and the deregulation of everyday life in a really'
similar manner, and even contentious way.'
So the actual market of Bangkok is'
filled with apartments that lack of kitchens.'
Or if they do, those are hardly used.'
This kitchenless society is based on an extremely rich food'
market that provides delicious food at low cost.'
From very minimal kitchens composed'
of a pair of wicker baskets, would sell precooked dishes'
to fully equipped mobile kitchens'
that sell complex recipes cooked in situ.'
Bangkok streets are covered daily'
for a few hours in places of cook--'
they are converted for a few hours of places of food'
production and consumption.
The fact that the street itself, which'
is actually the street food, which is actually'
properly called hawker.
So the hawker food is good and cheap,'
facilitates its daily consumption,'
and allowed to relieve daily housekeeping annoyances,'
and in some cases, avoid even to have a kitchen.'
The economic efficiency of these cooking infrastructures'
relies on various factors.
Most of the hawkers just cook one dish.'
So they are specialized, or at least a few dishes.'
But the good ones want just one.
And the fact that they cook just one dish actually'
allows them to refine the recipe,'
as well as to optimize purchases and infrastructures,'
reducing radically the cost.
I learned that talking to them.
They are father and son.
The son is taking over the business.'
He has turned 65.
And after 40 years helping his father,'
he's finally taking over.
His grand, grand, grandfather was already'
cooking there in the same spot, cooking the same delicious pork'
with rice.
Even if, looking at the picture, it'
doesn't look like a proper place to eat,"
most of the ministers of Bangkok, of--'
sorry-- Thailand, eat here daily.'
And when they open, they have always a long line'
to be able to eat the delicious recipe.'
It's actually a well-known food cart and food place"
to eat in Bangkok.
When I asked [? kam, ?] my research assistant why'
she never cooks at home, she actually'
took me here to understand.
And I radically and totally really fast'
understood the reality.
[? kam ?] was not able to cook this dish.'
And it would be like for me, or for anyone in Thailand, able'
to cook this dish.
First, you don't have the access to that quality of pigs,"
basically, because just this family have access to that.'
And Just this family too have access'
to a recipe that have been working'
for more than a century.
So even if you try it at home, forget it.'
So considering that, me being Spanish, that I love cooking,'
I understood why most of Bangkok's citizens"
didn't cook at home.
Alongside with this, the fact that they are movable'
allows them to avoid rents and high expenses,'
decreasing extremely their costs, their expenditures.'
In cooking and consumption terms,'
the whole city is organized under an illegal system.'
Not illegal-- a legal.
Despite that these Kitchens are not officially regulated'
by the government, a set of social agreements'
allow them to operate daily, being able even'
to be provided properly with electricity and water'
supplies, many as well as many other supplies.'
I was also fascinated by all the infrastructure'
of these mobile kitchens that pop up, hide'
in garages during a few hours, pop up again.'
And of course, the social agreement'
implies the police that in an unofficial manner'
regulates and help the social welfare.'
Lately, the government is trying to get control of the situation'
by cleaning the streets of hawkers.'
When I traveled last year in Bangkok,'
I found it was actually the topic to talk.'
A radical step that most citizens do not support,'
and that may affect actually the existing kitchenless market.'
For me, it was curious to compare'
this way of living to how Singapore faced'
the same regulation process decades'
ago in a successful manner.
So how to use regulation for good and for bad.'
After Singapore got independence in the '60s,"
a huge reform based on housing took place in order'
to face the existing crisis.
At the time, many people were living'
in unhygienic slums and crowded, squatter settlements.'
The prime minister, Lee Kuan Yew,'
founded then the housing and development'
board, the famous HDB, to promote social housing, which'
progressively built and defined the actual domestic landscape.'
If at that time just 9% of the population'
were living in social housing, nowadays, more than 80%'
of the population lives in a public house, properly called'
HDB homes.
The new housing developments included the regulation'
of hawker food in order to eliminate street cooking'
for hygenic reasons, and at the same time'
preserve the culture by regulating expenses,'
thanks to a system of low rents.
It came out then the hawker center'
as a new architectural typology that'
would allow to allocate all those movable cooking street'
infrastructures under one roof.
Hawker centers are always strategically'
situated at the center of each housing development,'
allowing them to be close and accessible to the inhabitants'
of each community.
And thanks to the governmental support, rents'
and infrastructure expenses are kept low,'
and consequentially, food prices are also low.'
By including these cooking centers in public housing'
developments, placing these infrastructures in proximity'
to homes, and regulating adequately their management,'
the government has assured the access'
to cook food on a daily basis and preserve the decreasing'
domestic cost and annoyances.
Alongside the hawker center, the so-called void deck'
also came out.
In the first decades of the Housing Development Board,'
they actually promoted a type of block'
which left the ground floor empty for community uses.'
The type of occupation that can be done in the void deck,'
as you may imagine in Singapore, is well defined and regulated.'
However, despite that, all kind of uses'
happen in a casual manner.
[music playing]
I realized at the end of the day that I was attending a funeral,'
that I didn't realize before, because I was playing cards"
with them, eating.
There was a kitchen.
And it was really nice, actually.'
So when the community agrees, all those programs'
can be enclosed and formalized and turn permanent.'
I could find some shared kitchens the neighborhood built'
for daily use, as this one.
They are quite exceptional, but despite that, they'
have become a reference for a new type of community kitchen'
that the government is promoting nowadays.'
This is GoodLife!
Makan.
It's a community kitchen place on Marine Terrace,"
and designed by DP architects that open daily'
to allow the elderly of the community to cook collectively.'
By elderly, I mean and legally means they're over 55."
And Montfort Care, which is a private association,'
takes care of the place.
And the government basically gives financial support,'
providing, among other things, food for cooking.'
There are no fixed rules.
So no rules.
Just that the food is free and available, and a fridge.'
And you just need to clean when you leave.'
So cooking things are self-organized,'
and internal packs and rules are rearranged permanently.'
Self-management, therefore, is encouraged,'
and also through the architectural design.'
So this case, I would say that it's similar as comedores"
communitarios in Mexico.
The success of the Singaporean kitchen'
typology relies on the fact that the regulation is open'
and allows citizens' appropriation."
After one year of its opening, it'
has been proved that the public expenses to support'
the elderly have decreased in that area,'
thanks to the kitchen.
So it seems that the typology will or may'
expand in the future years in Singapore.'
I could [? answer ?] this type of community kitchens'
for caring.
So if we were looking before for community kitchens for women,'
in this case--
and for housekeeping, labor, wages, in this case,'
it's quite clear that there is an idea of caring, caring"
of the other embedded.
And I could find this typology also in Japan.'
And this is a really nice story as well.'
A couple of years ago, in Saitama, near Tokyo,'
a quite exemplary case called Care Yoshikawa opened.'
The architect, Chie Konno, was commissioned'
to design the offices of an association dedicated'
to the elderly, actually.
Entering the design process, she proposed'
to install a large kitchen in the offices'
to do errands for the elderly from time to time.'
The kitchen was defined as a large table, as you see,'
where a stove and a point of water were installed.'
And in front of it, a large window'
was opened to allow visibility of the association activities.'
What was surprising is that, during the week'
of the construction process, the children of the neighborhood'
began to appear by the space gradually, playing in it,'
appropriating it.
So it turned out that many of them'
spent many hours alone while parents'
were working until late, and ended up eating really poorly.'
So basically, children between three years old and 13,'
14 years old, they're alone from 5:00 to 11:00 PM mostly,"
and they have to prepare by themselves dinner as well'
as doing the homework.
So suddenly, being aware of this reality, a group of women'
decided to start cooking regularly for the children.'
Currently, they meet every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday.'
They cook dinner for around 30 children.'
And at the end, what is really interesting,'
is that actually adults also have started'
joining the dining ritual.
And the kitchen for children has ended up'
being also a neighborhood kitchen.'
So residents have started growing food on their balconies'
needs to nourish the kitchen, and collective participation'
allows offering low cost meals for everyone.'
And what was actually really surprising'
is that this actually is not the only case in Japan.'
As this one in the picture as well.'
So in the last years, this new type'
of community kitchen for the children'
have emerged in the country.
They are called "kodomo."
They're so numerous that an association"
called "Kodomo Shokudo" was founded'
in 2015 to group them all.
And nowadays, there are around 250 kodomos,'
and they're expanding.
And I would say that probably Japan'
was the richest country in my research, an important fact.'
Basically also regarding the fact'
that I could find a wide diversity of kitchen typologies'
and realities.
That's kodomo kitchens.
But what's surprisingly actually is that Tokyo housing market"
is filled by apartments with shared kitchens of all kinds.'
Several companies, as the one that we have in the image,'
[? oak ?] House offer excusively to this new Japanese housing'
typology, that as they consider is becoming clearly'
a market trend.
So at Oak house, last year, I could encounter, like,'
seven real estate companies.
I didn't double check this year, but they're really expanding."
So just taking a look to the impact on Tokyo,'
this image shows just available rooms in available buildings'
that they had in last August 2018.'
So imagine the ones that are occupied.'
And imagine that multiplied per seven.'
So it's really interesting to see the wide range of building"
types, from really large infrastructures as these ones,'
where the kitchen is shared by many, many inhabitants,'
hundreds.
And they're called social houses, basically"
because they're communicated as that, as places to socialize."
I could even find ones that they promise you that you'
would be married in two years.
[laughter]
Truly.
It's Japan.
That happens.
To really small ones, as these ones,'
where a small group of people from four to seven people,'
usually workers, working people, shared the kitchens.'
And these ones, they call them "shared houses"'
to distinguish their typology.
And among these small scale shared houses,'
there are really famous ones that have been widely published'
online in Arch Daily, because they are really, really'
well-designed, as this one, the Yokohama Apartments designed'
by ON Design and Erika Nakagawa.
Or this one designed by Satoko Shinohara and Ayano Ishimura.'
Or this is a bit freak one called'
Nanjya, that alongside the shared house,'
they host a cafe on the tree.
So you can go and have a nice coffee there.'
That's Nanjya.
It's really nice.
To this one, that is probably the newest and most'
extraordinary one.
It's called SHIBUYA CAST.
It's an extremely expensive and elitist living community,"
placed on the top floor of a newly built tower in Shibuya'
and designed by Naruse Inokuma.
And they call themselves a co-family.'
And it's actually really difficult to get in."
I had the chance to be with them for a while.'
So diversity of types and rents proved'
that the economical factor is not the main cause'
of the success of the typology.
Despite the diversity, they have all in common one thing--'
their inhabitants choose to share the kitchen in order'
to belong to a community and socialize.'
It is said that this social trend'
is started in 1995, with the first big earthquake in Kobe.'
Due to the natural disaster and its consequential social'
crisis, it emerged a feeling that'
the contemporary Japanese society, which'
a large part lives alone, consider'
that the data says that more than 50% in Tokyo'
is living alone nowadays.
So this contemporary Japanese society'
have not been able to keep--
sorry.
So the feeling is that, actually,'
this contemporary social society has not'
been able to keep traditional neighborhood bonds,'
erasing certain values of the social fabric.'
This need for socialness boosts a new culture of sharing that'
has also been empowered by the medias, that'
create imaginary values of sharing through films and TV'
series.
The first one, the first popular one, I would say,'
came out in 2000.
And it was a film called Room [? share. ?]'
But then we could also recall 2008 Last Friends serial,'
or probably the most known one, that if you have Netflix,'
you can have access to it.
That is Terrace House, which is actually nowadays being'
produced also by Netflix.
If I go backwards, let's take a to look to the kitchens"
that these people have, and take a look'
to Terrace Houses, imaginary.
You can tell that there's something there."
So in most of these kitchens, the act of cooking'
is not done collectively.
They might do it by-- they essentially share the space.'
So they do it once in a while.
They don't cook daily.
The act of sharing this domestic space'
is already a strong tool that allows'
to raise community bonds for good or bad,'
accepting the values of this dissent and conflict.'
Despite that the Japanese case is quite particular,'
this sharing culture tendency is also a worldwide trend.'
I cannot deny that.
And it's being widely discussed and debated."
And of course, housing is not a part of all of these.'
Cases as a well-known "we live in New York"'
and similar companies prove that.'
I traveled to China to visit You+.'
You+ is probably the most significant housing company'
that, understanding the potentialities of this'
international sharing culture trend,'
is promoting housing with shared facilities.'
They have already 18 complexes in different cities in China'
that host around 5,000 people.
And they want to expand soon internationally.'
The founder of the company is Lei Jun,'
who is the founder of the mobile company Xiaomi.'
This could be an anecdote, however You+ uses clearly'
Silicon Valley imaginary, offering these houses'
to start-up entrepreneurs, and promising a better business'
improvement through the use of their social spaces'
and netbooks.
And despite the values of the project,'
it raises many doubts and questions'
regarding benefits outcome of all of this,'
especially by the fact that, despite using welfare'
social vocabulary, the economic outcome is clearly'
capitalized for the benefit of just one company.'
But let me go back to Japan to finish my story.'
When Kobe's earthquake, a collective housing group"
was fine by the government to come up'
with developments for those affected by this disaster.'
Among others, the professor and architect Ikuko Koyabe'
worked in the Kobe area, promoting shared spaces'
for the reconstruction.
10 buildings with collective kitchens'
were built at that time.
Most of them for the elderly, which were actually'
the most needed ones.
And [? manafuneai, ?] the one that you have in the picture,'
was the one to be built. Despite the success of the project,'
the kitchens were abandoned, and nowadays they look like this.'
Totally not in use.
The lack of adequate process of design,'
as well as the lack of a good regulation, pushed the decay.'
Basically, inhabitants never felt that those shared spaces'
were theirs.
This is another one with shared kitchens.'
And despite that, Ikuko Koyabe kept researching and promoting'
the typology.
She wrote many books about co-housing,'
having a special interest in co-housing in Sweden.'
She traveled there, registered carefully'
the Swedish experiences to push similar projects in Japan.'
Finally, in 2003, the first co-housing'
was built up, this one that we have in the image.'
And after two years of design process,'
in which all the inhabitants were included'
to assure future appropriation and design [? equation, ?]'
Kankan Mori was built up.
Kankan Mori occupies a [? pre-existing ?] second floor'
in a building that exists already,'
where there are 28 units of housing with kitchens.'
And they have also many spaces shared as the kitchen, as well'
as other types.
And after Kankan Mori, after that,'
it was founded, a collective houses corporation'
to promote this kind of co-housing in Japan.'
And it has been quite active in the last years,'
building six buildings of co-housing.'
And they are three or more.
They have three more under design.'
So as you see, the apartments have a little kitchen.'
And they share a big one.
In 2009, they could build their first new building,'
fresh from scratch.
This one.
And usually these buildings are occupied by around 50 people.'
That's kind of the normal community size."
And they just share two, three meals weekly.'
So clearly the share cooking and meeting'
does not satisfy a daily need, as I was mentioning'
in previous Japanese cases.
So it's definitely a social act.
In the Japanese case, it is clear'
that sharing domestic spaces allow to define and raise'
communities, empowering them.
This is also how the space of the kitchen'
operates in rural areas in Senegal.'
And this is going to be my last trip, and the one'
that I explain tonight.
When I traveled to Dakar, I could'
encounter many apartments that share'
a room as a space for cooking.
Usually, this tiny room is used by two to four families,'
that they share the space, but never the cooking devices,'
never, never, never the fire.
And I'm saying that because here fires are movable as well."
So it would be easy to share it.
This way of inhabiting comes from a rural tradition,'
where the house is usually defined by a set of rooms.'
Let me go to it.
So as I was mentioning, this way of inhabiting'
comes from a rural tradition, where the house is usually'
defined by a set of rooms that enclose a patio.'
This typology, called "maison impluvium"'
came out to organize and protect the members of a clan.'
In those dwellings, usually more than one family'
lives, occupying several rooms.
The number of rooms, room occupation per family'
varies depending on the needs of the family'
and depending on the timing.
And they all share--
so basically, I think that it's really important"
to reinforce, because I found it so impressive and interesting,'
the fact that they can actually expand and increase'
their living spaces.
And they always share the center,'
as actually a cooking place, where fires define different--'
sorry.
Different cooking spots.
Here they're drawn.
And it looks like this.
So you can see that here it's happening,"
two cooking at the same time.
And she was actually cooking as well.'
So three cooking at the same time.'
So in this typology, the collective kitchen'
becomes a center of a set of dwellings'
that are in relationship without necessarily [? leading to ?]'
physical contact.
But by sharing one of their pieces, they are related.'
I brought a lot of these images, because probably this'
is the case that impacted me the most.'
And actually it was the first trip'
that I did at the beginning of these two years.'
So if we abstract this idea and remove the food'
from the equation, so forget about the cooking'
and the kitchen, we would have a city'
composed of housing and collective rooms,'
strategically located as satellite spaces'
where any household could happen.'
A fragmentary domestic city, a city'
composed of diffuse homes, whose limits vary depending'
on the use of the inhabitants.
The Senegalese typology dates centuries back'
and embodies a whole architectural [? dilation ?]'
of a vast African area, made with humble technology'
in a non-urban context.
And it's maybe one of the cases from this trip that"
could be seen from far away, from some'
of those problems concerning developed capitalist'
and technological societies.
Nevertheless, this particular case'
renders visible how architecture and society'
are bonded and interact.
Overall, above all, makes us questions'
from tradition about the past and about its immediate future.'
All these kitchen stories that I explained tonight,'
even if they are very diverse, share some things in common.'
All of them are attempts to reshape the relations'
between public and private.
All of them are attempts to redefine our notions'
of urban and domestic spheres.
And in a more and more connected society'
through this invisible technological landscape,'
these architectural typologies appear as physical tools,'
as a possible physical correlate through those invisible bonds.'
All of those examples that I showed tonight could be seen'
not only as places of production,'
and/or empowerment of women, of communities,'
but maybe also as possible precursors of new typologies,'
able to transgress and redefine pre-established social'
and especially domestic conditions.'
Thank you.
[applause]
[inaudible] a little and then I'll turn it to the--"
thank you so much, Anna.
I want to quickly turn the question'
and answer to the audience, but just'
to develop maybe a little bit where'
you were beginning to go at the end, which I would say'
is the big question about how do you start'
to move the analysis part of this project'
toward design, toward proposition?'
And you begin to find patterns in common, looking maybe even'
for, I don't know if typologies any longer is the right"
word, but somehow patterns of form and occupation'
that cross the very diverse cultures.'
And one of the things--
so I have a two part question.
The first is more culture and form or something.'
The street food, the Asian street food,'
seems to me in a way the one that is so familiar,'
and also maybe unchangeable.
I mean, unchangeable unless it turns'
into something else entirely, or difficult to develop,'
because it's so successful, but it"
depends on very particular cultural'
and agricultural situation, access'
to raw material, tradition of that kind of eating.'
And it's very successful.
It seemed quite different to me than the Peruvian example,'
or the Japanese, which are also very different.'
But there, there were still cultural peculiarities,'
but you could start to see formal patterns'
in the architecture develop, which'
might be continued and refined.
However, I guess what I'm wondering is,"
are the cultural situations so particular'
that they limit very much design possibilities?'
It seemed to me that in the wealthier cases,'
let's say, you could find analogs to the Japanese case,"
I think, in New York, and even Boston.'
You could certainly find them in Seattle,'
where 20-year-old, 30-year-old men, in a lot of the cases,'
like in Seattle, live alone in very small places,'
and need collective kitchens for social and nutritional reasons.'
But then it's not about empowering women."
It's about empowering 30-year-old tech guys, right?"
And it seems very, very particular, those situations.'
Whereas in the Japanese case, I think it's also--"
they were very young.
And I do think there's a whole generation who"
marry later, if at all, who often live alone'
and need that social and nutritional combination.'
So I don't quite know the question,"
but it has something to do with, are the sort'
of ethnographic limits so severe that a design proposition is'
actually inhibited by the particular cultural situation?'
Or actually are you beginning to see certain commonalities,'
certain typologies that might lead'
to a more propositional phase of the project as opposed'
to the analytic phase?
I mean, on purpose I wanted to finish with a floor plan.'
I have hardly showed floor plans.'
Most were images.
I did that because one of my struggles'
was all the time to try to come out'
with a kind of more architectural design'
perspective.
And at the same time, I was struggling all the time'
with the fact that I was putting on the same table'
such a diverse reality that in certain moments'
they were not comparable at all.
And after these two years of intensity,'
I do realize, also after doing a PhD,'
that it's such a different way of looking at things."
When you jump from one country to another,'
you eat, eat, eat all the time, and you just'
swallow references.
At the end, what you swallow is actually'
an individual decision.
So at the end, it's the way I look at things,"
and therefore the way I do understand'
our contemporary condition.
And definitely my story is an occidental story that'
comes from a certain culture.
And definitely the way that I have explained these things'
today definitely has a [? will ?]'
to have a consequence on our close proximity.'
And if you ask me more specifically,'
definitely that's why I thought that the Senegalese case,"
not only because the typology is so clear,'
but also the fact that it was the most ambiguous one.'
It was really difficult to discuss for me,'
going there and asking and researching, asking'
their inhabitants how actually they inhabit.'
Which was the Senegal?
The-- yeah.
All the houses that I showed are places in the south of Senegal,'
in the area of Casamance.
Most of them are little towns.
Some of them are not that little, like 15,000 people.'
But still, it was really difficult to discuss,'
for instance, what the family meant for them, which'
kind of uses they were doing.
Even if they were doing exactly the same thing'
as I was doing, sleeping, eating, we are all the same.'
But the way they understood the house, it was so different,'
that for me, I thought that somehow it was the most--'
the closest one to what I think that it should be,'
the future of our homes.
The corollary part, which also has'
to do with moving it forward, I think'
it's maybe a little unfair, because it's not"
part of your story.
But one of the things that obsesses'
our students a little bit are technologies,'
robotic technologies, new kinds of transportation,'
including robotic or autonomous vehicles.'
You mentioned a little bit delivery in one of the cases,'
I think the Peruvian case.
But is it your sense that--
mostly you emphasized in situ, that the cooking'
and eating both.
And this is why it works as a community, something'
more than just food, but a place for childcare and maybe even'
elderly gathering.
It works because it's in situ, in a collective space."
But can you imagine future delivery systems,'
maybe when they become economical, where'
a collective production of food could be delivered rather'
than eaten in situ, could be delivered and have'
positive impact?
Did that ever maybe in the Japanese case'
or in the more wealthy cases, did things like that'
ever come up?
Actually, that there was quite a discussion in the 19th century,'
here in New York.
Oh, is that, right?
Yeah.
For the hotels?
Yeah, for the hotels.
And honestly, it was a time when the pneumatic tube came out,'
as well as the electric [? card. ?]'
So all the newspapers were talking'
about how to use that in order to transport'
deliveries, and especially also cook and grow food.'
So yeah, they tried even to ship soups,'
to see if the tubes were sealed enough'
and the soups were arriving properly heated.'
So yeah, that happened.
Questions, comments for Anna?
Yeah, Andrew.
So I'm sort of intrigued by this last [inaudible].."
Hi.
Good to see you.
Oh, great, a microphone.
So I'm interested in following up"
on Michael's line of thinking, in an admittedly somewhat"
perverse way.
So forgive me, but all of your examples'
are sort of beautifully bottom-up,'
and sort of community-driven.
And there is this incredibly organic conviviality.'
Like, very close to that, if we pursue'
Michael's line of thinking, is actually"
the idea of sort of mealtime conviviality as a service, that'
could potentially be penetrated by capitalist inclinations.'
And so I'm wondering if you ever saw, in addition"
to these sort of bottom-up community'
spaces, its corporate other.
Is this also coming soon?
The case, the Chinese case that I brought,'
I brought it for that.
So my goal was also to show that I'm aware of that reality."
And it's a double-sided coin.
It's really complicated to figure out,"
because it is a discussion that is on the table,'
and it's really hard.
There's too many things, and it's really difficult"
to understand.
But it's clear that the use of language,"
they appropriate certain vocabulary'
from certain policies in order to operate'
in a different manner.
I was shocked by the fact that, for instance,'
all the workers of the company live there.'
So they work 24 hours, 24/7.
And that shocked me.
But what actually really shocked me,'
is that they were really proud.
Of course, the owners of the company, I met the CEOs,'
and they don't live there.
So yeah, there's a lot of risk.
And it's better to say it in between lines."
One more.
It's a long way away. [? it's not ready. ?] I"
wondered if you had considered in this review the kibbutz'
collective of the '50s and '60s in Israel,"
and its evolution to today, as a model for some of the things'
that you've shown here.
Yeah, I have left out of the scope a lot of cases,'
that I guess I will continue.
I mean, it's been too much.
I promise I have to do this.
It has been the most difficult lecture I've done in my life."
I was really nervous, as you might have seen.'
Basically, because it has been really hard,'
not only to try to sum up all that I have seen,'
but also being aware that there is'
a lot that I haven't included.
Of course, I didn't include, for instance,"
all of the European cases.
Like in Sweden, thanks to also the visibility of the awards,'
that also was actually really helpful.'
I rechanged all my initial proposals,'
because I started receiving a lot of emails of people that'
actually live in those topologies,'
and they were inviting me to go.
And I avoid the European cases, because they'
are much more studied.
And I focus more on those cases that are not that well known.'
I would say that, yeah, Bangkok and Singapore are'
the exception, but I just was curious about the consequences'
of street food, basically.
And because I tried at that moment'
to establish a connection between recipes and shared'
kitchens.
So to understand which cultures actually'
have a culinary culture that can just happen'
if you share the kitchen.
And that's, for instance, in Senegal and the southeast"
of Asia, but I didn't talk about it"
because there was too few time.
And I am aware of the kibbutz.
It might be a field of research for the close future.'
Last question here.
Hi.
I was just wondering that, after coming'
back from all of this research to your practice'
as an architect, particularly in a Western context'
with certain--
I mean, I don't know if it's in Spain as entrenched"
as it is here, but entrenched ideas about private property,'
and entrenched ideas about how housing is to be built,'
have you have you had any success, strategically'
as a practitioner, trying to like to implement some'
of these more collective ideas?
And speaking to an audience of people'
who are either practitioners of architecture'
or are endeavoring to be so, do you have any advice in terms'
of how to maybe even sell it?
I really appreciate that question,'
because I'm going to come back to the floor plan."
I definitely was not clear enough before.'
My fascination for this floor plan has many, many reasons.'
And mainly, as I was starting to introduce before,'
it's because the idea that generic is there."
So it was really difficult for me'
to understand how people live, because actually the space'
was not clear, and also their culture was not clear for me.'
So the combination of both, it was really confusing.'
So I understood how a space can be generic in the sense that,'
due to its form and speciality, and even materiality,'
you cannot even distinguish its program.'
And I thought that that was really powerful in housing.'
And it's something that, before going to--"
I actually traveled to Senegal because a former student'
emailed me.
"Anna, what you\'re talking is here."'
So I went.
And she was totally right.
So this idea of the generic space'
was already there on the table as an interest in the office.'
And we're still pushing it.
For instance, now I'm pushing it farther."
So it's not only about building spaces"
that are generic in program, going'
beyond the idea of equal rooms.
We know that, but pushing that farther.'
But also how to raise collective spaces'
that might not look like collective'
and produce collectivity.
So for instance, in Mexico, we're"
building now a social housing block,'
alongside with other architects, that HHF is teaching here'
this semester.
So HHF is also building with us, and [inaudible],,'
and [? dogma. ?] And thanks to the Tatiana Bilbao.'
Well, a big group.
We're designing a lot of housing there."
And our block is placed in a neighborhood'
that deals with drugs.
It's a quite violent neighborhood."
Even if they don't consider it, I do consider it."
To the point that you cannot have a car in the street.'
And we do know that they're going to fence our open spaces,"
but we're designing them in order"
to force that to happen, to force a discussion'
and a dialogue between neighbors.'
So there are huge terraces in front of generic rooms.'
And those terraces are generic in the sense that exactly it's"
difficult to tell if they are collective or private, if they'
are individual or for one family or for two families.'
So we hope that that's going to force them, actually,"
to an active dialogue.
And we'll see the consequences.
We're really lucky, because the government"
is allowing us to try.
Sometimes it's really difficult to do that."
I'm just impressed at how the original proposal really"
focused on kitchens.
And housing, of course, has to be there,'
but it was a kind of corollary.
It was really about kitchens.
And now it's amazing to me, the way even"
the stress on where the raw material food comes from,'
how close is it, or how is it delivered to the place,'
how community space, how ages from the children'
to the elderly, how the community'
space deals with all these.
The kibbutz example is a good one,'
insofar as there has to be a kind of totalizing'
analysis of all these factors.
When it really started with, let's say, just the kitchen,"
it ends up with an entire city sector, if not a city itself.'
And I think that systematicity that you uncovered'
was really, really helpful.
So thank you, Anna.
Thanks for coming back.
Thank you.
[applause]
