Hello.
I'd like to-- is it working?
OK.
I'd like to thank you all for joining us"
this evening for a talk by the British architect'
Amanda Levete of Amanda Levete architects, or AL A.'
But first, there are a few announcements'
to be made about a few upcoming events as part of our larger'
public lecture series here at the GSD.'
Please join us tomorrow at 6:30 PM right here'
in Piper for our annual John T. Dunlop lecture'
with Raphael Bostic, who is the president'
and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.'
Raphael will be discussing the future of fair housing,'
as this year marks the 50th anniversary of the passage'
of the Fair Housing Act.
And then again on Thursday at 12:00, April the 12th'
at noon in Gund 123, there's going"
to be a lecture by architect Eric Parry.'
He\'s going to deliver a lecture entitled "Webs, Plates,'
Fists, and Gloves--
Designing with Metals in Architecture."'
So it's truly an honor to be able to introduce"
Amanda Levete this evening to the GSD community.'
Amanda is founder and principal of AL A,'
an international, award-winning design and architecture'
studio in London.
Levete studied architecture at the Architectural Association'
and worked for Richard Rogers before joining Future Systems'
as a partner in 1989.
At Future Systems, she realized groundbreaking buildings,'
including the Media Centre at Lord's Cricket Ground"
and Selfridges department store in Birmingham.'
Here, I would like to underscore the term "groundbreaking"'
and to situate her work in the context'
of an architectural discourse at the time.'
In the mid-'90s, while American academics and architects wrote"
and debated blobs and digital processes,'
something else was happening in the United Kingdom.'
Levete's practice was realizing a new architecture,"
with double curvature, complex geometries,'
and abandoning architecture's modernist paradigms"
of the past.
She challenged architecture's fabrication,"
and constructability, and ultimately, its image.'
Since its formation in 2009, AL A has completed projects'
at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 2017 in London,'
the V&A's largest building project in over 100 years;"
the MAAT, Museum of Art, Architecture, and Technology'
in Lisbon in 2016, commissioned by the EDP,'
one of the world's foremost energy companies;"
the Central Embassy in 2017, a 1.5 million-square foot'
luxury shopping mall and hotel in Bangkok'
on the former grounds of the British embassy;'
and then a 13-hectare media campus'
masterplan in the headquarters building for Sky'
in 2016 in London and the MPavilion in 2015 in Melbourne.'
While it is evident that architecture and the practice'
of building is at the core of AL A,'
other designworks such as lighting, seating, shelving,'
cutlery, tables, and furniture allow the studio'
to advance form, material, and fabrication, which'
has direct impacts back on her architecture.'
One additional distinction that I'
would like to make about her work'
would be about the role of architectural effects'
in the real.
When fully constructed and inhabitable,'
meaning real glass, real cladding, real surfaces,'
real mass, her architecture reads less like a building'
and more akin to a digital rendering.'
I believe to make the real appear'
unreal is no easy task, fueled by imagination,'
rigorous detailing, and a conceptual attitude'
towards materiality.
Examples of these architectural effects'
include thousands of glittery disks glowing'
in the context of Birmingham's industrial city,"
or the elongated land form, plinth, and window massing that'
reflects a Lisbon waterfront, or the insertion'
of a pleated plaza into the Grade I-listed V&A museum.'
All of her architecture fits into its immediate context'
but suggests a new, incredible, culturally engaging world'
unto itself.
Levete's accomplishment in contemporary architecture can"
be noted by the many awards she's received,"
including the 2018 Jane Drew Prize for women'
in architecture; a CBE, which I am going to spell this out--'
it's Commander of the British Empire--"
in recognition of her services to architecture'
recognized by the Queen of England; and an RIBA Stirling'
prize in 1999.
Please join me in welcoming Amanda Levete.'
[applause]
Well, thank you so much, and thank you for inviting me.'
I was actually here more than 25 years ago'
with my former partner, Jan Kaplicky.'
And we came to give a talk.
And they'd forgotten that it was, like,"
the day before hand-in, and there was just'
a handful of people.
And it was so difficult.
But here I am, back in a new guise'
as principal of my own office.
I say my own office, but I have three directors from three'
different continents.
It's a very-- we are 50 people.
It's a very collaborative place.
And for me, this slide speaks of who we are'
and the culture of our office.
It's a messy pile of shoes.
It speaks of the very different individuals'
that make up our studio.
But it also talks about a sense of common endeavor'
and common purpose.
And when you take off your shoes, you strip away a layer.'
It creates a very informal way of working'
and maybe an informal way of designing.'
And there's a kind of subliminal message to clients"
as they come in the door and they're politely"
asked to take their shoes off, which'
is, you're not in for a passive ride."
We're all in this together.
And for me, that is incredibly important.'
And it underpins the culture of our office.'
And by the way, taking your shoes off'
also keeps the carpet cleaner.
So I'm going to start with MAAT, the Museum of Art,"
Architecture, and Technology, which we'
completed in October of 2016.
It's in the most fantastic site in Lisbon,"
the westernmost part of Europe.
And Lisbon is a city whose identity'
has been formed through its geography.'
So it's a very outward-looking society."
It's a very tolerant society because it"
looks back not just to Europe, but it looks to Africa,'
to South America.
It's from where the great explorers set off."
So it has this sense of outwardness.'
And yet, it is also the waterfront,'
which is so extraordinary because it is facing due west.'
It's cut off from the rest of the city"
by railway tracks and a four-lane highway.'
And one of the first things that we did,'
the [inaudible] question that we asked ourselves when we started'
this commission--
and it was, by the way, a direct commission, which is so nice.'
It wasn't a competition--
was, how can this building speak of the openness?'
How can we use the topography, the geography,'
to drive the building?
And more importantly, how can we use the design of a building'
to reconcile a city whose waterfront is cut off'
from the historic heart?
And you can see in this photograph also'
the relationship to the old electricity power'
station, a very important part of Lisbon's"
industrial heritage.
But here is this artery that totally bisects the waterfront'
from the rest of the city.
But we resolved this by making a very simple move--'
to design a bridge which is a segment of a curve which'
starts on a square, the other side of the railway tracks.'
And you land on the roof of our building.'
The bridge is almost open, not quite open.'
The building opened before the bridge.'
But this act of connecting it not just literally,'
but metaphysically back to the city, was a very important move'
and began to suggest a way of circulating on the building.'
It also creates a really significant, new, public'
outdoor space on the roof.
And we have created additional public outdoor space'
by taking the steps down into the water.'
And at high tide, they flood so that there's"
a very kind of visceral relationship'
between the geography of the place and the building.'
And we had to also find a way to integrate an existing'
substation which is below the topography'
of our building, which powers still part of the city.'
This is the opening.
Like I said, this is not the bridge that we have designed,'
but this is the bridge on the opening weekend of the museum.'
There were so many people who came to the opening'
that the bridge had to be closed because it'
was in danger of collapse.
But I realized that we'd done something right"
because we'd captured the public's imagination."
And this is the first weekend of opening.'
And what you see on the top of the building,'
it's not just planting.
That's people.
80,000 people came over two days from a city whose population'
is less than half a million.
So it was a really extraordinary kind'
of endorsement of taking a radical view with a building'
but being extremely sensitive to its context,'
and to see the museum not just as a cultural project,'
but as an urban one, and an urban one'
that resolves very complex and difficult issues of access.'
And the Electricity Museum next door'
is part of the kunsthalle or part of the art campus.'
We took a decision very early on to create a building that'
was very low-slung in relation to the power station partly out'
of respect for the muscularity of that industrial heritage,'
but more importantly, so that the views from the city'
would not be impeded by the building'
and the views from the other side of the river looking back'
to the city would not be impeded by the building.'
So it was, if you like, counterintuitive'
to put the galleries partially below ground,'
but it was that move that allowed'
us to use the building as a piece of urban fabric,'
to knit it into the city, and to create a sense of presence,'
but one that has a certain modesty, perhaps.'
The light that you get in this part of Lisbon'
is quite extraordinary, and it bounces off the water.'
And we wanted to find a way just to capture this'
and to amplify the extraordinary effects.'
So this is the roof, which has now'
become a real destination in its own right in Lisbon.'
So it's a place you can hang out."
It's a place from which you can look over to the river,"
or you can look back to the city.'
And really, it's one of the most popular destinations in Lisbon"
now.
You can go running there.
You can just hang out.
But more importantly, you have, for the first time,'
a different perspective of the city because you look--'
it's a perspective that people of Lisbon"
have not had before, where you look back'
at the city because of this aspect'
that you get from the roof.
So this is looking back across the city.'
So this is the kind of metaphysical link'
and then the physical link with the bridge itself.'
And here, you see it in relation to the bridge,'
and also in relation to the power station.'
So there's a very kind of soft relationship"
between the orthogonal geometry of the power station'
and the topography of the museum.'
And from the roof, at sunset, you'
have the most fabulous view.
So it's a place that people just gather to take photographs."
The presence of the building completely changes'
according to the sun, according to the time of day,'
according to the time of year.
And you can see here how we've taken the steps down"
into the water to really just heighten its siting'
on the edge of the river.
And it's an extraordinary part of the river."
You actually can see that moment where river becomes ocean.'
There's literally a line in the water"
that signifies the change.
So we wanted to--
having taken the decision to make a low building,'
it had a very stretched elevation.'
So how do we deal with a facade that's extremely long"
but break it down into a series of tiles'
that have a human scale and that really will catch the light?'
So we worked very closely with a fantastic family business'
called Cumella, who are based just outside of Barcelona.'
We actually looked to work with companies in Portugal,'
but they didn't have the technical ability"
to mechanically fix the tiles in the way that we wanted to.'
So we worked with Cumella.
And we're extremely lucky when we"
find a maker or a manufacturer who is prepared to experiment,'
who is prepared to explore the limits of something'
in order to advance the debate, perhaps.'
And these tiles are a little bit three-dimensional so'
that sometimes, the sun catches the edge.'
Sometimes it just catches the front.'
And according to the geometry in plan,'
the tiles either match up, or they begin to offset.'
And so you create this kind of textured pattern to the facade.'
And it feels very different according to the angle'
that you view it from.
And this is the tile.
They're handmade.
And we wanted to choose a glaze that was very neutral so'
that it would pick up the sun, that it'
would pick up the changing weather conditions'
and give a different presence according to the time of day.'
And we also wanted to add a layer.'
So we added this crackle glaze because a crackle glaze speaks'
of history.
And it creates a certain depth so'
that when you get close to the building,'
there's a depth that you can discover that you"
wouldn't otherwise be aware of.
So at different times of day when the sun is bouncing off'
the water, and then this is what happens at sunset.'
Literally, the whole building turns gold.'
And the water turns gold.
It is a really wonderful moment.
And because the climate is so great there,'
you experience it many, many months of the year.'
And then as dusk falls, it becomes almost a kind'
of silvery black.
What we couldn't have imagined and was incredibly gratifying"
is how people would appropriate and use this building.'
And here, people are using the facade, because it's so long,"
as a musical instrument.
And what we didn't design, but I wish we had--"
but now we'll know for next time."
But we discovered it by chance after the building'
was finished, that if you stand at a certain point'
below the overhang of the roof, the sound of the waves'
are amplified in that moment.
And it's a very poetic moment to come across it,"
but one of those really nice things that I could have'
pretended we designed it but we didn't."
But it's there.
What we did design was this.
And knowing how strong the sound was'
and how we could use that to advantage--'
so the sun hits the water, bounces off'
the water onto the underside of the overhang of the cantilever,'
and then down through a roof light into the galleries below.'
And this is during construction.
But so during the winter months when the sun is not so strong,'
we allow shafts of daylight to come through the roof'
light, which can also be completely cut off'
if a curator doesn't want to work with daylight."
Or during the summer months, the geometry of the roof light'
is such that it is self-shading, and you just'
get indirect north light.
At a certain time of day in the winter,'
you'll be able to see the reflection of the water"
on the floor of a part of the gallery.'
And then when you're in the gallery itself, you look up,"
and you see the sky.
But you also see the edge of the overhang above you.'
And because this is a museum of three disciplines,'
of art, architecture, and technology where'
three disciplines coincide, we wanted all these spaces'
to flow one from another, for there'
to be no barriers, for there to be no doors between spaces.'
This is as you come in.
It's the big, oval space.
It was really for installations.
And because the power station is part of the art campus,'
all the exhibitions here are site-specific and are designed'
in response to the spaces in the building--'
so a very technical ceiling, and then ramps or steps down'
into this oval gallery.
And this was the first installation'
by the artist Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster to coincide'
with the opening, where she put a net over the space'
so that the visitor becomes the protagonist of the space.'
And then smaller spaces off that space that'
are used for new artists, for exploring technology,'
and a room designed specifically for triple video projections,'
and a space that is called the Project Room, which'
is for up-and-coming Portuguese artists.'
And it has become a very Instagrammable and Instagrammed'
moment, but that has certainly contributed to its kind of--'
it's in the collective imagination"
of the people of Lisbon.
And it's not just the gallery.
It's also become, in the year and a half since it's"
been opened, one of the most visited museums'
in Portugal, which is really quite extraordinary given'
that it doesn't even have a collection."
So I used to go to Lisbon a lot and was always trying'
to find nice places to eat, quirky places.'
And one time, we went and found this place called'
Sol e Pesca, which was a tiny, former fishing tackle shop that'
only sold tinned fish.
And there was something about this little place that'
just caught my imagination.
And when we were back in London and we'd"
lost a number of competitions, and we were really'
just down-hearted about losing competitions-- and you all'
know that a competition is a huge and emotional investment,'
a huge financial investment.
And we thought, OK, enough, enough losing of competition.'
Let's invest in ourself.
Let's, why not, open a tinned fish restaurant?"
So what started off as lunch became a project.'
So this is a pop-up restaurant in Soho that was open for 3'
and 1/2 months--
badly-timed, actually, because it wasn't summer."
It was the winter.
And you can't sit outside in London in the winter."
But it became very much an expression of who we are.'
We sourced the tins.
The dominant nationalities in our office'
are Spanish and Portuguese.
And so through family connections,'
we sourced the best sardines, the best anchovies, the best'
tuna.
And we turned the humble tin into an object of desire.'
And with our obsession with the V&A and vitrines,'
the window of the restaurant became the vitrine'
for these beautiful tins.
And in fact, there is a place I went to--'
I've been to twice since I've been here in Boston"
called Saltie Girl, which has some of the tins'
that we sold in Tincan.
And so the shop window is the vitrine.'
And then we did everything.
We did the furniture.
We ran the restaurant.
We kind of got a taste for being a little bit entrepreneurial.'
And we designed this light to showcase the OLED film'
technology, very thin film, and persuaded OLED'
to give us the film for free.
And then we assembled the lights ourselves'
in the office with a view to turning it'
into a business, which, of course, hasn't happened."
But we got the taste for a kind of self-generating project.'
And I do think that--
I don't know what the system is in America as much"
as in Europe, but I feel that architecture, as a profession,'
we're becoming quite marginalized."
And the competition system is getting'
a little bit out of hand.
So much is asked of so many people for so little money.'
It is not sustainable, and it's not right."
And so the more that we can generate our own projects'
and get back in control--
and there's so much opportunity.
And there is so much money to do things.'
So to be entrepreneurial, this is'
a project called Pitch/Pitch.
We have quite a sporty office.
And the team liked to play five-a-side football'
after work, but it was really difficult'
finding a pitch that was available.'
And so we thought, OK, then we'll"
design a system using carbon fiber'
of removable, stackable, five-a-side football pitches'
that can be put on sites that are vacant temporarily'
and that will meet an unmet need.'
And we've presented it at various conferences,"
and it's had a lot of traction.
And we're now putting together a business case"
to see if we can't just generate our own projects."
So it can go in any gritty, urban site,'
or it could even go on the roof of a high rise.'
And we're working with ARUP, the engineers."
And this has really been stress tested to a high degree.'
So we're confident that the business"
plan will come to something.
Talking of carbon fiber, this is a project, MPavilion.'
It's in Melbourne.
It's Melbourne's answer to the Serpentine commission."
And the site is a really beautiful park'
in Melbourne, Victoria Gardens.
And it felt to me that to do a pavilion,'
it's not like doing a building.
There's an opportunity to take a different kind of slant on it."
And we wanted to try and recreate'
a tree canopy and the poetics of a tree canopy'
that you would let some light in and dappled sunlight,'
and that it could also move in the wind.'
And that is-- you don't have that liberty of something"
moving in the wind in a building.'
But with a pavilion, you do.
So we thought we would explore it'
and designed a system of a series of petals'
that we imagined would be in resin with carbon fiber that'
were supported on very slender, 4-meter high carbon fiber'
tubes, but all interlinked together.'
We had a hunch how to do it.
This was the render that we did and presented to the client.'
But we didn't know exactly how to do it,"
and we didn't know who we were going to work with."
And Australia is a very long way away.'
But on one of my first visits there to develop the project,'
we were introduced by ARUP to a company called mouldCAM,'
who started off in the nautical engineering business'
and were moving into using composites in building.'
And we were so fortunate because they'
were a partner who were prepared to explore'
this idea of creating ultra slender petals with up'
to five-meter span.
So with them, we started to, through trial and error,'
figure out how to create these petals because we wanted'
the resin to have a translucency so that you'd"
get this beautiful light under it'
and for the strength to come from carbon fiber strands that'
would be part of the pattern of the canopy.'
These partners we worked with were so extraordinary.'
I mean, this looks quite kind of Heath Robinson, and it was.'
But this was to build a very simple jig'
to wind the carbon fiber strands and then figure out'
the right degree of set of this translucent resin.'
And that was the really tricky bit.'
What they discovered was if you let'
the resin set too much before you put the carbon'
fiber strands, they would just float to the top'
and have no structural performance.'
If you put them in when it was too wet,'
the whole thing would be completely floppy.'
And the only way they could do it'
was to work double shifts, from 7:00 in the morning'
until 9:00 at night, to make sure'
that the carbon fiber strands go in at the exact right moment.'
So the commitment from this company was really phenomenal.'
And that is-- but we're very demanding of our partners,"
but we're very giving as well.
And we received incredible commitment from them.'
So you can see, these carbon fiber rods'
are actually developed for camera tripods,'
came from Finland.
The resin, the translucent resin,'
came from France used in the surfing industry.'
And you can see here, the carbon fiber spans, which'
connect each of the petals together,'
the ribs, and then the strands, which'
give the petals the strength.
And so you really do get this kind of quite dreamy quality'
of a tree canopy, and beautiful shadows and reflections'
on the ground.
And then at night, it became a little bit more blingy.'
And the lighting was within the cables of the columns.'
And the petals themselves, worked as amplifiers.'
So it was a really great space for performances,'
and it was hugely atmospheric.
Some projects really are kind of created and sculpted'
with atmosphere rather than through form,'
and this is one of them.
This is a competition which we lost--'
so I don't understand why we lost, but we did--"
for a mosque in Dubai, where the mosque--'
and it's in the shadow of the World Trade"
Center designed by Foster.
And we wanted the whole kind of conceptual thinking'
to express this journey from the everyday to the spiritual.'
So it starts as a park, and the park then'
becomes the roof of the mosque.
And really, the atmosphere is through the extraordinary light'
effects that you would get through this aluminium,'
self-shading structure, but that is calculated'
to allow light in where you want in this great moment'
at the end.
On a very different scale, this is the building in Bangkok,'
which opened last year.
The shopping mall had opened before,'
but the hotel only opened last year.'
So it's on the site of what used to be"
or was the gardens of the British embassy.'
It was the most expensive piece of real estate'
to change hands--
seven-story shopping mall with a luxury multiplex'
cinema, and then a 35-story hotel,'
which is run by Park Hyatt.
And we'd never worked in Asia before."
And I was really keen that we would try and find'
a way that the building would speak of its place'
and that it was something that just couldn't be done anywhere."
The topology of the building has this very typical plinth'
and tower.
And we were very restricted by how high we could'
go with the tower and where we could do the tower,'
and restricted by the height of the plinth.'
And so it became, how can we use the form of the building'
to integrate the tower with the plinth?'
And how could we use the cladding--'
and the cladding on a shopping mall is largely opaque.'
How could we use that--
and it's a developer's budget--
but to somehow reflect the chaos of the city'
and reflect the city back to itself.'
And Bangkok is chaotic the entire time,'
but in a really beguiling way.
And so we designed a very simple system of aluminum shingles.'
There were four different tile types.'
And it's literally just a folded aluminum plate,"
incredibly low-tech because in Asia,'
the socioeconomic condition is the exact opposite of the US'
and Europe.
So labor is extremely cheap, and technology is very expensive.'
So how can we kind of play to that as a strength?'
We would never be able to afford to do this in the US or Europe'
because the hundreds of thousands'
of tiles and the labor needed to fix them.'
But it meant that we didn't have to use"
a cheap, standard cladding system.'
And it meant that we could create a kind of moir  effect'
on this very massive facade.
And then having done this, the expectation, the kind of drama,'
has to play out inside as well.
And there are some great moments when you're looking up"
through the atrium of the mall.
From the biggest project we've ever"
done to the smallest project we've ever done,"
this is the ceramic table.
And this project again came out of our obsession with ceramics.'
We were working on the V&A and the museum'
in Lisbon at the same time, both using ceramics.'
And I wanted to explore how could we'
design a sort of small, modest, ubiquitous piece of furniture,'
but, through its materiality, change it'
into something completely other.
And could we design and make a table in ceramic?'
Well, of course, our first explorations into this'
were just--
I mean, they were really quite amusing.'
In the kiln, the legs would totally buckle,'
and it took us a long time to realize that we couldn't just"
use a typical ceramic.
We would have to look at high-tech ceramics.'
So we looked to different industries.'
And there's [inaudible],, a company"
who used ceramics in the aerospace'
and the medical industry.
And we used a material, silicon carbide,'
which is an incredibly dense, strong ceramic, but wanted,'
then, out of complete perversity,'
to change this table into something other,'
to apply a glaze that spoke of history.'
And the crackle glaze was developed.'
It was the result of an accident in the kiln in the Song'
dynasty.
And when they discovered it, they'
realized it was a thing of such beauty'
that they worked out how to replicate that.'
And so how could we apply a kind of artisanal crackle glaze'
to a very high-tech ceramic?
And what is extraordinary, what happened'
when we did that-- and first of all,'
the glaze would just kind of slip off.'
It took a lot of experimentation and work'
with our partners to figure out a way of doing it.'
But somehow, the crackle glaze speaks'
of the kind of fractal, molecular makeup of this silica'
carbide.
And it was a real moment of revelation.'
Now, the only problem was that we went through six prototypes'
because after the table had been fired,'
and nobody had glued this silica carbide'
and then fired it again before we got to the perfect table.'
But then it had to be glazed, and it was taken somewhere else'
to be glazed, near [inaudible].
And while the final table that was'
going to be the subject of an exhibition was in the kiln,'
there was an accident in the kiln'
where the plate above the table just failed.'
The connections failed, and it fell on the table'
and smashed it into a thousand pieces.'
So the table that never happened,'
but it was a piece of research where we'
were following our own illogic.
And one day, when we have the energy,'
we're going to pick it up, and we're going to make it happen."
And the final project that I'll talk about"
is the project for the Victoria and Albert Museum'
in London, which opened in summer of last year.'
This is our site.
It's between, on the right-hand side, the Henry Cole"
wing, the first building of the V&A,'
on the left, the Aston Webb.
It's on Exhibition Road.
It's a lost site that had never been used by the museum before."
And the V&A is part of a much bigger vision'
by Prince Albert--
Albertopolis-- to have, if you like,'
a campus of three museums.
So there was the V&A, the Science Museum,'
and the Natural History Museum.
And we wanted to find a way, how could'
that sort of idea of a campus that the three museums was'
to bring culture and art to the people-- that was'
the vision of Prince Albert?
Was there something there that would inform what we did?'
This is the photograph taken in 1863'
of Henry Cole, who was the founder, if you like,'
of the V&A, and his architectural and engineering'
team standing in front of the Henry Cole wing.'
And more than 150 years later, standing in the same place,'
is my team and our engineers from ARA.'
So we've moved.
We've moved on.
It's worth putting this project into a little bit"
more recent context.
So this is-- you may remember Libeskind's scheme"
for the exact same site.
He won the competition in '97, but it was abandoned in 2004."
And remarkably, during that time, it got planning consent.'
But for one reason or another, it never happened.'
And obviously, I'm delighted because otherwise,"
we'd never had had the job.
But for me, this building marked a moment,'
and the demise of this building marked a moment.'
And it was the end of the building as icon.'
And so when we were invited to do the competition,'
we took a completely polar position.'
And I wanted to speak about the iconography of place'
rather than the building as icon,'
that in the intervening years, the V&A had restated'
their brief and decided that what they actually needed'
was a vast gallery space below ground.'
But we took this to its absolute limit,'
but saw it as an opportunity to really'
reimage the relationship between the city and the museum,'
between the street and the museum,'
because I believe very strongly that the role of the museum'
in the 21st century is to engage in contemporary life'
and to go beyond the confines of its buildings.'
So we took a very radical and rather daring'
position when we did the competition, which'
was to suggest that we open up the Aston Webb screen, which'
previously was completely solid.
So in the context, this is the street'
that goes from South Kensington to Hyde'
Park, the Natural History Museum, the Science'
Museum, and the V&A. So you see, here,'
the vision that it was a campus of three museums,'
but each one felt extremely isolated.'
So our first move was to take the street into the museum'
and take the museum out onto the street.'
But to do that, we had to negotiate a big level'
difference of two meters between Exhibition Road'
and the entrance, the ground level of the V&A.'
So we created an area of high courtyard'
that then just bleeds into an area of low courtyard.'
And this was about wanting to maximize'
the outdoor public space, to maximize'
the amount of courtyard so that the courtyard could become'
appropriated by the public for any number of installations,'
for a place just to hang out, or for parties.'
And this was our competition render,'
where you can see that we had taken this very brave move'
to challenge the opacity of this Grade I-listed screen.'
And Grade I listing is the highest level of protection'
that you can get for a historic building, and rightly so.'
But I think because there is only one thing in life'
that you can't design, and that is heritage."
And so we have a duty to be incredibly'
respectful and sensitive to our heritage,'
but we also have a responsibility'
to breathe new life into buildings'
and to make radical propositions.'
And if we can do the same, to do both at the same time,'
then I think we can begin to move forward.'
So when we first went to--
this was the screen before.
When we had won the competition, and we'
went to English Heritage and the planning authorities'
and presented our scheme, they simply said no.'
And well, they would do, wouldn't they?"
Because the presumption with Grade I-listed buildings is you'
do not touch them.
You just don't mess with them.
So we went away.
We did not change what we designed at all,'
but what we changed was the way that we argued the case.'
So we did a huge amount of research,'
and we had seconded two researchers from the V&A.'
And we argued that this screen was originally'
designed to hide, and now the social imperative is really--'
it's the opposite.
We must reveal these fabulous elevations of the museum'
to the public.
But it was a very difficult argument to make.'
And then we found this drawing.
And this drawing is the original competition drawing'
that Aston Webb did for the V&A. And what'
it shows is that screen was--
although it was still solid at the bottom,'
it was much more open.
And there was a garden behind it.'
And once we'd found that drawing,"
we knew we had the argument, because what had happened'
was after Aston Webb had won the competition'
and during the construction phase, same old--'
they've run out of money.
And the boiler rooms, which were intended to be below ground,'
they could no longer afford to have them below ground.'
So they had to move them above ground.'
And he redesigned the screen at the last minute'
to conceal the boiler rooms.
So we had our argument.
It was originally designed to conceal the boiler rooms.'
The boiler rooms have long since gone.'
Now we can go back to his original vision.'
So nine months later, we got it.
And it has had a very radical effect on the way'
that people enter the museum.
The main entrance is in Cromwell Road,'
which is a quite busy highway.
And there's a very grand entrance, and it's wonderful."
But you go up a grand set of steps.'
And it's a little bit overawing It can feel intimidating,"
whereas this is a totally different way.'
You just drift in off the street.'
You don't have to go to the museum."
You can hang out in the cafe that we've put there."
You can just hang out in the courtyard,'
or you can go into the museum.
But to create that courtyard, which looks now very'
effortless, was an unbelievably challenging'
structural operation because we had, in effect,'
three historic elevations where we'
dug a very deep basement of 15 meters that wanted naturally'
to fall in.
So they had to be literally propped up'
with these massive props.
And we also had to underpin a wing of the V&A'
while the museum remained open to the public'
and while its very precious collection remained in place.'
And we had piling rigs within one foot of historic stone'
cornices.
We had to pile down 50 meters with tension piles.'
Because when you dig a very deep basement,'
you normally put a superstructure'
on top, a multi-story building or a high-rise building.'
But all we had was a courtyard.
And so the grounds just wants to lift.'
Because all the earth has been taken away,'
the slab wants to lift.
And Cambridge University, who work closely with ARUP,'
came to the site and was so taken with the structural drama'
that they have installed fiber optic monitoring'
cables in the tension piles and the [? rough ?] slab'
because they believe that the movements that will be recorded'
over a number of years may disprove'
the elastic theory, which is the theory on which engineers make'
these calculations.
And if that is the case, we will have advanced knowledge'
in a way that we simply couldn't have imagined at the beginning."
And it's a huge credit to the V&A"
that they allowed us to, in effect,'
use this project as a case study, which will be published'
when the data is complete.
So we have the cafe which we put in the area of sun.'
The one kind of--
there was a paradox that drove our thinking of this.'
And this is that the big event, the really great moment,'
is the gallery below ground, but you can't see it."
So this idea of how do we make visible the invisible'
became a driving force in the way'
that we design, both at the kind of macro and the micro levels.'
So we wanted the courtyard somehow'
to speak of what was below.
And the V&A is a very didactic institution.'
Its buildings are didactic.
Its mission is didactic.
And its collection is didactic.
Could we take that, that idea?
Could we literally reflect it through design'
and, in doing so, reveal to people why'
things are like they are?
And for me, narrative in architecture'
is really important.
And it's important because it helps"
us to make sense of things.
It helps us to understand.
So this is an oculus that we designed'
that allows dramatic shafts of daylight'
into the gallery below if the curators want to use it.'
And the curators are incredibly conventional'
and generally don't, but hoping that they will open"
their eyes to the potential.
But this oculus does more than that.'
It also reveals the very structure'
that supports the courtyard that is the gallery ceiling below.'
And the structure of the gallery ceiling in itself'
is a huge piece of engineering because it spans 38 meters,'
and it's a folded steel plate.
And so what you're seeing here is that steel plate revealed."
We've conceptualized it as though it's an empty museum"
vitrine.
We painted the inside of the lining of the plate'
red in a kind of reference to old-fashioned museum vitrines'
that used to have red velvet.
And you see down into the void of the gallery space below.'
And then on the inside of the balustrade that'
is highly polished, it reflects the structure back to you.'
So you have this very kind of visceral reading'
of what is below.
And because of the complexity and the evolution'
and the way that the V&A has developed over centuries,'
we wanted to kind of reference that as much as possible.'
What you see here is the redundant lift'
overrun from the Libeskind scheme, which'
was put in before the project was abandoned.'
And it'll always be there.
We thought, wouldn't it be nice to kind of reflect it"
so that somehow, this building speaks'
of a very complex and rich evolution of design?'
This is one of the drawings.
I can't tell you how technically complex this project was"
as a piece of engineering, as a piece of coordination,'
as a piece of reconciling historic fabric'
with new technology, but it was extremely difficult.'
But here we want to make it look as easy and as'
effortless as possible.
So by creating three new entrance doors into the museum,'
we've cut through the stonework, through the fenestration."
And by doing that, you reveal this really beautiful profile'
that you weren't really able to understand before."
And it is a kind of classic case of through subtraction,'
you reveal more.
This, you're now entering into the new entrance"
hall in the existing museum.
So we opened up the windows.
We let the light in.
There's a completely different--
there's no big, central entrance desk."
There are the interactive screens at the back.'
And V&A staff greet you and ask how they can'
help you enjoy your journey.
So it's this sort of idea of informality, which"
starts in the courtyard, is then played out in the entrance'
itself.
And there's a very nice detail here."
If you can see, there's a great tradition"
in the V&A of marble floors.
And we had do-- oops, sorry.
We had to take up the mosaic in order to do the project.'
And so we kept all the mosaics.
We washed them, cleaned them, and have'
used them to repair other gallery floors in the museum.'
But then we then had made new mosaics in the same colors'
and at the same size, which we have relayed as a border'
because these borders are very traditional.'
But the border is a reflection of the tiles in the courtyard'
that I'll speak about in a bit, which,"
in turn, are a reflection of the geometry of the structure.'
And what was a very funny parallel, coincidental'
parallel, the mosaic floors of the museum'
were allegedly installed by female prisoners'
in Holloway Prison.
And the group-- there was a cooperative'
that was formed just for this project in Italy,'
an all-female group.
There was a filmmaker.
There was a graphic designer, who'
laid these mosaics onto mats before they'
came to be installed in London.
So they're not in prison, but it was just--"
I thought the female thing was quite nice.'
And we did something else that was very radical.'
And again, none of the other competitors had done that.'
We proposed that the stair down in the new gallery below'
would happen within the museum.
Now, it was much easier and it would have been much cheaper'
to have put that stair down into the gallery directly'
from the courtyard, but we didn't do that for two reasons."
One, this project was all about maximizing'
the amount of freespan gallery space'
below because that's what the V&A need,"
and maximizing the amount of courtyard space above.'
And of we put the stair in the courtyard,'
the whole courtyard would be filled'
with a kind of paraphernalia of entrance halls and cloakrooms.'
But there was another reason, that we didn't want this"
to be seen as an extension.
We wanted there to be an inextricable relationship'
between history and modernity.
And by putting the stair in the existing museum,'
I think we create that.
But to do that was far from straightforward,'
and we literally had to support the weight of history'
and underpin while the museum was still in operation.'
These new beams and columns, originally, we'
had designed them to be white.
But when I came to the site and I was just so'
struck by the enormity of the task'
that they were doing, that they were holding'
the weight of history, that it was very clear to me'
that we had to paint them in a color that'
spoke of that kind of structural prowess and drama.'
And so we have painted them in International Orange.'
And International Orange has a great provenance.'
It was the color that first aircraft were painted in so'
that they would be seen against the sky.'
It's the color of the bridge, the San Francisco bridge."
It's a color that has meaning.
And you understand here, I think, this inextricable link'
and the kind of conversation between history and modernity.'
And we're able to-- because this space is so vast,"
we've let in light.
And it just animates the experience'
because going down below ground can be very disorientating.'
But if you always frame views of where you've come from,"
and if you play and manipulate daylight,'
your descent feels extremely comfortable.'
And we have two stairs, one to go down and one to go up.'
And the reason for that is partly'
the kind of drama of kind of passing ships.'
But it's also so that you exit through the shop,"
but you do not enter through the shop.'
My big critique of the V&A is that to come in'
through the main entrance, you have to go through the shop.'
And it's always felt a little bit--"
I'm a purist.
I think your shop is the reward, the end of your journey,'
not the beginning.
And then the daylight we play with so'
that there's this moment.
When you get to the bottom of the stairs,'
there's actually more daylight than when you came in."
So there's this kind of magic moment,"
and you're drawn down into the underworld by the light."
And this is the folded plate that spans 38 meters.'
And it's an extremely technical ceiling"
that's doing a huge amount.
And this is the kind of light that you can get.'
And depending on the time of year, it can be very diffuse,'
or it can be used dramatically to highlight'
a certain sculpture.
So we've calculated exactly where the light"
falls at every day in the year.
And really, this kind of very technical scene from which you'
can suspend a car, which has all the AC, the lighting, the AV,'
it comes from very heroic tradition of steel and iron'
galleries at the V&A. And in fact, the gallery spaces that'
were used for their headlining shows, which have now'
moved to a new gallery, are these two galleries that'
have had, for years and decades, suspended ceilings.'
So their next project is going to be to reveal these.'
So by doing our project, they then get to more projects.'
So it was a really clever piece of master planning from the V&A'
to have a very strategic vision for the museum.'
And then you've been to the show."
You've seen what you came to see,"
and you're drawn up by the light."
And as you go up, the views open up.'
And this sgraffito wall, which was done by art students--'
because the Henry Cole building was the original Royal College'
of Art Building--
had never been seen by the public before,'
and it's been nearly cleaned.
And we wanted to frame it and reveal it as a moment.'
And also, through the efficiency of the folded plate,'
we created a mezzanine level in the void of the structure.'
And that is where we put the toilets and the cloakroom.'
So all of that kind of paraphernalia'
is put within the void of a highly efficient structure.'
So on a rather gloomy day, but this is the sgraffito wall'
that you see.
And then to come back into the courtyard, this idea of making'
visible the invisible, how can the character'
of the surface of the courtyard, how'
can that speak of its place?
How can we invest it with a character that could only'
come from its position in V&A?
And we wanted the courtyard to read'
not as a series of orthogonal tiles,'
but to read as a kind of color field'
where the lines between the tiles become blurred.'
So we took the three-dimensional geometry of the structure,'
and we extracted from it-- we flattened it,'
and we extracted from it a two-dimensional pattern'
that we then rationalized that would'
become the setting-out pattern for the tiles.'
And this is actually the setting-out drawing'
for the people who had to lay the tiles.'
So it feels like it was a difficult thing to do.'
But again, we had fantastic craftsmen'
who were working on it.
But the tile, there's a story behind the tiles themselves."
And the V&A has one of the most important ceramic collections'
in the world.
And I became very obsessed with ceramics'
and got taken around the ceramics collection'
by the keeper of ceramics, who knows more about ceramics'
than anyone else in the world.
And it was an extremely kind of humbling and privileged moment.'
Anyway, how could we use that?
We have to use that access to knowledge somehow'
to invest in the courtyard.
And these really beautiful Chinese glazes'
where the pigment pools where you have depth,'
could we find a way of capturing that?'
So we embarked on what we thought'
was going to be a six-month piece of research'
but turned into 2 and 1/2 years research.'
I just want to make it clear that the building was not'
delayed 2 and 1/2 years because the research took longer.'
We had the latitude in the way that the program was phased.'
But there was a moment where the V&A wanted'
to know what plan B was and could'
we design plan B if this idea of the ceramic courtyard'
wouldn't work.
And I said, no, we're not going to do."
We're taking on a massive amount of work at our own expense"
to do this.
But if it doesn't work, we'll just have granite sets"
and be done with it.
But we had to believe that we had the tenacity'
and that we would find the right partners to work with.'
And we did.
We found a company in the Netherlands'
called Tichelaar, who are actually the oldest'
company in the Netherlands.
And they are again a family business.'
And with family businesses, there's"
a different relationship with your work.'
It's a much more emotional relationship."
And you need that kind of emotional connection'
to persuade people to embark on a journey'
that you don't quite know where it's leading."
And Tichelaar, we chose them in the end'
because they use porcelain.
They use porcelain on facades as a kind of [inaudible]..'
But I've never used it in a public courtyard."
And in fact, porcelain hasn't been used in public spaces"
before.
It was used in the Victorian times as kind of porches,'
but they're extremely slippery and just at a domestic scale."
So you couldn't possibly do that."
But there's something about the base color of porcelain"
which is so much more beautiful and'
nuanced than a typical ceramic.
It's got this kind of whitish, grayish blue,"
whereas a typical ceramic is more biscuit-y.'
And these are tiles, six tile types,'
all made by hand so that each one is slightly'
a different size.
And they're not rectified afterwards."
They are parallelograms in shape because that's"
the pattern that was extracted from the three-dimensional'
structure.
And by having parallelograms, you'
begin to lose the sense of orthogonal joints.'
And we further complicated that visually'
by putting a diagonal through the tiles'
and then having grooves in the tiles because we wanted'
to also introduce color and for the color'
to be glossy like that beautiful Chinese glaze.'
But of course, glossy is slippery.'
So by having a thin groove and putting the glaze--'
all of the glaze was done by hand with a kind of pipette.'
Your foot doesn't ever touch the glaze."
So through a lot of testing--
and we had to go through an extremely rigorous process'
of getting this certified because it had not'
been used before--
we came up with these tiles.
And so you can see how white the base clay and the kind'
of subtlety of the blue glaze.
We then thought, having achieved that, well, we just push it'
one little bit further.
And we would use porcelain tiles to clad the cafe roof.'
And we thought, well, they're smaller."
They're more straightforward, and we'll extrude them."
So the die was made.
And there's a reason you don't extrude porcelain,"
and it's because it doesn't work."
So we pushed it as far as we could and then had to retreat.'
And the cafe roof tiles are also made in the same slipcasting.'
It would have just been a lot cheaper and faster'
to extrude them, but maybe next time.'
And then we had a different-- because you're not"
walking on the tiles on the cafe roof, obviously,'
we wanted to play with the subtlety of the glaze'
and with a kind of reflection on the glaze.'
But the glaze was so subtle and the color was so subtle'
that the people who were glazing them'
kept forgetting whether they'd put the glaze on before they"
put them in the kiln.
So they had to spray them with this copper oxide'
to remind themselves that they had been glazed,'
and the copper oxide just burns off in the fire.'
But there's something about the alchemy of ceramics"
and the process in the kiln that I enjoyed about that.'
And I don't know if you can see here, but in the sunlight,"
you really see the subtlety of this glaze.'
So there's porcelain tiles there,"
and all this porcelain, and this is white concrete.'
Just coming back to the gates and that screen'
that we opened up and altered, it'
was full of emotional resonance because it has shrapnel damage'
from World War II.
And when we were trying--
having got the permission to open up the screen,'
we were then faced with a kind of paradox'
of having to close it at night.
Because although it's a public space,"
it belongs to V&A. The collection's priceless."
It has to be secured at night.
And it was the piece of design that took us'
almost the longest because it was so hard to come up'
with a solution that somehow spoke'
of the gravitas of a museum gate, also'
that would allow you to still see through them.'
We looked at glass gates that would go into the pavement.'
We looked at conventional gates.
Nothing seemed to work.
We commissioned a survey drawing because we had to label'
and number each of the stones.
We had to remove the entire screen in order to do the work'
and then put it back in its altered form.'
And the stones that weren't being put back"
were stored for posterity.
But when the drawing came back from the surveyors,'
they had mapped the imprint of the shrapnel damage.'
And at that point, we knew how to resolve this problem.'
So we designed the gates to be 35-mil thick, solid aluminum,'
anodized aluminum, that are then perforated.'
And we designed a piece of software'
that would calculate the different angles of perforation'
so that from certain vantage points,'
you would be able to see the imprint of the shrapnel damage'
in the exact place, the stone that had been removed.'
And in that way, we're not just making the invisible visible;"
we're memorializing absence.
And you can still see through it.'
And as you pass along it, it feels something incredibly'
modern and dynamic, but it has this kind of reference back.'
And you can see here that when the gates are open,'
you understand where that shrapnel damage was'
because the base of the columns is new'
because the structure of the columns'
is now completely different, having taken away'
the base of the stone plinth.
And then there's a very nice detail."
After the bombing, there was this inscription'
that talks about the enduring values of the V&A'
despite the blitz.
And we are now--
we've got a new inscription that speaks about the reference"
to the shrapnel damage and how that'
can be read in the new gates.
And then finally, we weren't asked"
to incorporate the royal crest.
It wasn't part of our brief.
But I was very struck by something'
that the then director of the V&A, Mark Jones, said to me.'
He said, no, you don't have to, but I just"
think it's important that we remind"
people of why this museum--
and particularly politicians, why this museum is here.'
And it was something that stayed with me.'
And I said, no, he's right.
But this is a particularly ugly rendition of the royal crest,'
so could we breathe new life into the royal crest'
and to make it more relevant.
And so we have picked out the royal crest.'
We've made it even bigger, and this time,"
in perforations that are just perpendicular because we'
didn't have to play with the depth of the shrapnel damage."
So you can see through those gates,'
but you can read, very clearly, the royal crest.'
And this is to say goodnight.
Thank you.
[applause]
Thank you so much, Amanda.
We're going to take questions from the audience."
But while we're preparing the questions,"
I might start with one.
OK.
I think what was really compelling about the work'
that you showed tonight, which is not something'
I would have thought about, is the way in which you'
use bare minimum architectural elements in the two'
main projects.
So roof steps and an oculus in the case of Lisbon,'
and-- or the flip, so ground surface steps and an oculus'
in the case of the V&A.
And I think this is really counter to the way in which'
maybe riverfronts are being populated'
or public spaces are being done, I think, in America.'
Or this might be a generalization,'
which is about packing of programs in kiosks and events'
and public architecture.
So can you speak to anything of this kind'
of bare minimum which--
Well, I think there are two ways, really, to answer that.'
One is about materiality.
And I think there's often, in architecture,"
a proliferation of too many materials,'
too much discord, too many things coming together,'
and that the more reductive you can be,'
the more coherent a piece of architecture you can create.'
But at the same time, it's really"
important to add depth and richness and narratives.'
So you have to choose your materials well'
that you can really mine them for what is there.'
But the other side of your question,'
which has to do with urban spaces and riverfronts'
and public spaces, I really feel strongly'
that we should not overdesign them,'
that you have to let what will happen happen,'
and that you have to see and understand'
how people are going to use the space'
and appropriate the space.
Both in the riverfront and the courtyard at the V&A,'
we could have massively overdesigned it.'
We could have done all the benches, and--'
but we deliberately pulled back.
And that's what makes it feel a very informal space,"
because there is very little there.'
And so you invest it with your own interpretation,'
if you like.
[inaudible]
You seem to use surface texture as a very important element'
in your work.
What does the texture of surfaces'
mean to you in terms of the architectural expression?'
Well, it's a way of--
I think surface and texture is a way of playing out narrative.'
So in the case of the courtyard at the V&A,'
it's this idea that the pattern of the tiles--"
and it comes from something.
It comes from the three-dimensional structure.'
It's an attempt to add a layer of narrative which"
will give you this kind of intuitive understanding'
of a kind of palpable sense of what is below you.'
So it's to kind of elaborate a story, elaborate a narrative."
And then in the case of Lisbon and why do we apply'
crackle glaze, why do we go to that extreme--'
why not just a plain, white tile?'
Well, in order to get to that tile,'
we had looked at maybe 50 different glazes,'
different textures.
And there comes a moment where it just feels right.'
And sometimes, there is no point in trying to overexplain it.'
You just kind of have that intuition'
that that is the color, that is the surface, that'
is the texture that is going to allow you to use the surface'
to amplify the light and to really root'
this building in its geography.
How do you compare the [inaudible]??'
Excuse me?
How do you compare the porcelain with marble?'
How do I compare the?
Compare the porcelain with marble.'
Oh, how do--
What do you--
Well, first of all, we wouldn't have"
been able to afford marble.
And porcelain-- marble isn't really"
part of the history of the V&A. The thing about the V&A'
is not only does it have a fantastic ceramic collection,'
but it also has ceramics embedded in the building'
itself.
And that's part of the building as a didactic piece."
And so for me, it spoke very much of its place.'
It's not because I don't love marble, and I do love marble."
But for the next project maybe.
But porcelain is-- although we associate it'
with kind of things of great delicacy and chinaware,'
it's actually an extremely hard, strong material."
It's completely vitreous, so it doesn't absorb water."
And it's harder than granite, and it's"
harder than [inaudible] stone.
So our associations with it are something of delicacy.'
But actually, it's extremely robust."
Thank you so much for showing some incredibly beautiful work.'
And it strikes me that it has a kind of refinement'
to it that very few other practices are able to achieve.'
In its refinement in service of what'
I would call a kind of remarkable entrepreneurial'
spirit--
so even in the way that you're describing the work to us,"
it's as though these buildings are instruments"
that are doing real work that the city can'
concede that you're sort of giving them"
something in exchange.
And I'm wondering if--
this is entirely a kind of open-ended prompt.'
But I'm wondering if you might talk to us a little bit more"
about architect as entrepreneur and architect'
as sort of self-initiator, and maybe the kind of relationship'
that that might have to the sorts of forms that you're"
designing and the search for a very high degree of refinement.'
Well, first for all, thank you for describing our work'
in such beautiful terms.
It's really, really nice.
I suppose what we're doing with materials is trying to--"
for me as an architect, what really drives'
me is to advance the debate a tiny bit,'
just a little, tiny bit in every project,'
to move something forward.
You don't always succeed, but to attempt that."
And I think it's our responsibility as architects"
to do that, to make progress.
So if you accept that position, then you'
have to take on a certain challenge.'
You have to form relationships with consultants,'
with makers who are going to go on that journey with you,'
because it's very difficult.
It was even very difficult with the V&A to say, trust me.'
It's going to be fine.
I'm an architect.
We can do this porcelain courtyard.'
It's never been done before.
It's not easy, and it took--
so you have to collectively have a huge sort of self-belief'
that you can answer the questions that you don't yet"
know that exist.
So yes, that's a kind of strand of entrepreneurialism,"
if you like.
I talked about being entrepreneurial'
in order to kind of get out of this cycle of a system that'
is eroding respect.
And I feel strongly about that.
And I think that large practices have the opportunity'
to do that.
I mean, we're a relatively small practice,"
and we really push it.
And we really try, but if only the larger practices'
would get behind that.
But they probably won't because that's not how they make money."
They're driven by a much more commercial agenda,"
which is an agenda that I'm not interested in."
And to do things that have kind of richness and depth'
and refinement takes a lot of commitment'
and a real commitment from everybody in my office.'
You have to be prepared to fail and fail again'
before you get to the point that you think you want to get to.'
But for me, that's the excitement"
of being an architect.
And therefore, the people that we attract to the office,'
they have that too because it's where you get your feedback."
Hi.
About more than 20 years ago, I listened'
to you give a talk in Cambridge, which was very impressive.'
You had, like, a double slide deck'
thing going on with two images.
And I specifically remember you being'
very angry, I think, about some of the things'
that you guys were trying to do, some'
of the things that you felt other people'
were doing that you didn't appreciate."
And you hadn't built as much back then, obviously."
And here you are, having built a significant set of work'
more than 20 years later.
So kind of joint question--
do you still feel you are somewhat angry at anything?'
And how do you feel things have changed'
for you over these years with what you've been doing?"
Well, I hope I didn't come across as too angry"
20 years ago.
I really had no need to be.
When I started with Jan as Future Systems,'
it was a really, really slow trajectory.'
And I guess-- and I know the point that you're"
making, that I used to put up slides to kind of demonstrate'
that we got there in, like, 10 years ago,'
and they're just copying us, and you know, just"
trying to make a point because it frustrated me'
that we were doing all this kind of advanced guard work,'
and others were profiting from it.'
But actually, so what?
That's just life.
You just have to be confident that you'
can be ahead of the game.
So no, I'm not angry now.
But maybe my frustration has shifted to something'
that I've already spoken about, which"
is that I do think the system that'
exists at the moment, the pressure,'
when you're going for work, to drive down your fees to suicide"
levels in order to win the job, it's wrong."
There are very few other professions'
that would accept that.
And I think as a profession, we have allowed ourselves'
for respect to be eroded, for our position'
to be marginalized.
And I think it's about time that we reclaim that."
The other thing that I'm really interested to reclaim that"
isn't really answering your question,"
but is this idea of risk as a kind of positive force.'
And I know that the kind of litigious culture in America'
is--
it doesn't exactly encourage you to take risks."
But if you look historically, you'
can only advance by taking risks.'
And the nature of being an architect,'
most things that you build are totally kind of bespoke,'
one-off.
And clients want that.
They demand it.
And yet, they want it to be risk-free.'
So there's this real kind of built-in tension"
that I just think we have to be a bit more upfront about.'
But I see being entrepreneurial as something hugely positive.'
One of the biggest issues in the UK at the moment'
is housing, affordable housing.
There isn't enough of it.
And what there is so low-grade.
And it's just wrong.
And why aren't practices like ourselves,"
why aren't we invited to do something?"
OK, we're not.
We probably never will be.
So let's just accept that, and let's create our own project."
Let's find a group.
Let's get people together.
Let's identify the unmet need.
Let's find the site.
Let's raise the money and propose something"
as a test case.
So I think we can take something really positive from that'
and just drive it a bit more.
We've become too much the passenger."
One more question.
Oh.
Hi.
I have a question regarding the research work in the office.'
I've seen some of your projects are"
more self-driven of a research, where kind of a research'
branched out from a commissioned work.'
I was just wondering, how do you balance'
that in your practice of the research work that you do'
and the commission work you do?
And also, how do you think that benefited your ongoing projects'
in the short-term and in the long-term?'
And when you decide to initiate a self-driven research'
or the research derived from a commissioned project?'
Thanks.
Well, yes, in a way, it's a kind of balance."
But when you-- there's a sort of impulse to do a research"
project, a self-driven project.
And if you try and be too kind of pragmatic about it,'
and too businesslike about it, and can we'
really afford to do this, you'll never do anything."
So we are--
I'm sure we could be much more commercially successful"
if we didn't embark on these things"
and if we took a different position,'
but that's not the kind of practice we are."
And we're not going to be like that."
So it goes with the territory.
And the rewards that you get are--'
they're not commercial rewards, but they're"
rewards in terms of the satisfaction that you get,'
the kind of intellectual fascination of pushing'
something to its limits, and what you learn.'
And it always becomes--
whatever you do becomes part of your repertoire.'
And it's something that you can then use again, refer back to."
And each project you do, your repertoire gets bigger,'
and your work gets richer as a result.'
So for me, it's incredibly important to do that,"
but it's not really--
I mean, the ceramic table was, in a sense--'
it was kind of perversely--
it was a little bit perverse, but there was an impulse there'
that just came because we were doing all this work in ceramic,'
and how could we take that forward.'
And I'm not sure how we can, but I think"
we'll come back to it one day.
And it was a great privilege to work'
with these extraordinary people who work on aerospace projects'
normally.
So it's part of our DNA to do this."
All right, so we want to say thank you very much, Amanda.'
Well, thank you for having me.
[applause]
