So good evening, and welcome.
It's a real pleasure to be here with you."
It's great to see so many of you here."
My name is Mohsen Mostafavi.
I'm the dean of the Graduate School of Design."
And I'm delighted that the honorable Martin Jay"
Walsh, the mayor of the city of Boston'
has kindly agreed to deliver the 2017 Dunlop lecture here'
at the GSD.
Each year, the Dunlop lecture brings'
to campus a distinguished speaker in honor'
of Professor John T Dunlop.
Professor Dunlop served as the chair'
of the Department of Economics here at Harvard'
and was also the dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences.'
In addition to his academic career,'
Professor Dunlop also served as the United States Secretary'
of Labor during the Ford administration'
and had a lifetime career in mediation, arbitration,'
and dispute resolution.
A distinguishing aspect of his career'
was his commitment to the nation's construction"
and housing industries.
And he played an important role in the establishment'
of the National Institute for Building Sciences.'
The Dunlop lecture is hosted by the Joint Center of Housing'
Studies here at Harvard whose mission'
is to advance understanding of housing issues'
and to inform policy through research, education,'
and public outreach programs.
Mayor Walsh will be introduced by Chris Herbert, the managing'
director of the Joint Center.
Chris has extensive experience conducting'
research related to housing policy and urban development'
both in the US and abroad.
A key focus of his research has been'
on the financial and demographic dimension'
of home ownership and the implications'
for home ownership policy of the recession, housing bust,'
and foreclosure crisis.
He's actually a very friendly and cheerful person despite all"
of these areas that he studies.
In addition to his role at the Joint Center,'
Chris also lectures at the GSD where'
he holds an appointment in the Department of Urban Planning'
and Design.
He's the co-editor of home ownership built"
to last balancing access, affordability, and risk'
after the housing crisis.
Chris and his colleagues have played a significant role'
during the past few years in establishing much greater links'
between the Joint Center, the GSD, the Kennedy'
School through teaching, scholarship and, of course,'
bringing important thought leaders like our speaker'
tonight to campus.
Please welcome Chris Herbert, who will introduce Mayor Walsh.'
Thank you, Mohsen, and thank you for your leadership'
of this school and for all your support for the Joint Center.'
Very much appreciated.
And before I forgot--
I forget, I also want to thank David Luberoff, Kerry Donahue,'
and James Chaknis of the Joint Center'
who did so much to organize and bring tonight's event to pass."
On behalf of the Joint Center, it's"
my privilege to welcome you our distinguished faculty, guests,'
students, and the broader Cambridge'
community to the 17th John T. Dunlop lecture.'
Each year the Dunlop lecture provides us'
with an opportunity to recall and pay'
tribute to Professor Dunlop for his many important'
contributions to the world of academia, policy, and industry.'
I know Mohsen said some-- gave us a bit of Professor Dunlop's"
history, but I'd like to share with you a few"
of our own reflections on him.
John was a remarkable man marked by a tremendous intellect,'
shrewd vision, unflagging energy,'
and for those of you who knew him'
and impatience to get things done.'
He applied these skills in a long and distinguished career'
as a scholar, a dean, a mediator, a labor secretary,'
and an adviser to presidents over the span of many decades.'
But among his many accomplishments,'
Professor Dunlop was also instrumental'
in providing support and guidance for the Joint Center'
from its founding in 1959 until the end of his life.'
He recognized the importance of having a center at Harvard that'
keeps a constant focus on housing given'
the fundamental role that decent, affordable homes play'
as the foundation for the well-being of families'
and individuals as a critical element of healthy and vital'
communities and as an engine of economic growth.'
It's not hyperbole to say that without professor Dunlop's"
unwaivering vision and persistent efforts,'
the Joint Center probably would not be here today.'
So this lecture is a small, but important way'
of marking our gratitude for all that he'
did to help the center pursue our mission, as Mohsen noted,'
of advancing understanding of housing issues,'
of informing policy, and of training the next generation'
of housing leaders.
Over its history, the Dunlop lecture'
has featured a variety of perspectives'
on critical housing issues offering'
a platform for distinguished leaders'
from the worlds of home-building,'
finance, advocacy, and policy.
Looking over the list of past lectures'
provides a snapshot of the housing'
issues that have been most salient'
since the start of the century when this lecture series began.'
Today, the country is certainly facing no shortage'
of housing challenges with near record numbers of renters'
struggling to find homes they can afford,'
the opportunities to own a home at their lowest level in half'
a century, communities devastated by the fallout'
from the great recession and the foreclosure crisis,'
and surging demand for urban living'
that threatens displaced establish low income'
and minority communities.
And in the face of these issues, the response'
from the federal government in these recent years'
has largely been notable for its silence.'
But with these problems literally at their doorsteps,'
mayors across the country have had'
no choice but to take the lead in seeking solutions'
with every resource they can muster.'
And it was in this context, the obvious choice'
for us to select for this year's Dunlop lecture was"
one of the mayors that the-- nation's mayors"
who have taken the lead in putting the housing'
at the top of their agendas.
And in looking for one of the leading'
voices across the country, we had'
to look no further than across the Charles River'
to Mayor Martin J Walsh in the city of Boston.'
Since being elected in 2014, Mayor Walsh'
has made housing and community development'
central to his effort to ensure that Boston'
is a thriving, healthy, and innovative city with equality'
and opportunity for all.
Reflecting the importance of housing for the mayor,'
in his first year in office, he released'
the plan Housing A Changing City: Boston 2030,'
to help spur and guide efforts to meet the city's stark need"
to expand the supply of affordable housing.'
In addition to his leadership in housing policy,'
Mayor Walsh was also an obvious choice'
to deliver the lecture given his experience in heading'
the building and construction trades council, which provides'
another direct tie to Professor Dunlop's"
legacy of strong support for labor unions,'
particularly, in the housing sector.'
Professor Dunlop was a founder of the Harvard trade union'
program, which continues to this day in the labor and work life'
program at Harvard Law School.
I have no doubt that Professor Dunlop'
would be tremendously gratified to have Mayor Walsh here'
to help remember his legacy as he would'
at seeing the assembled faculty, students, and community'
who are here today who share his deep concern'
for the challenging housing issues we face as a country.'
So is with great honor and pleasure'
that I introduce to you Martin J Walsh,'
the 54th mayor of the city of Boston,'
to deliver this year's Dunlop lecture."
[APPLAUSE]
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Chris, and I want to thank everyone here'
at the Joint Center for Housing Studies.'
I also want to thank associate dean Luberoff and good friend'
of my policy team at city hall, I want to thank you as well.'
Dean Mostafavi, thank you very much as well,'
and everyone at the Graduate School of Design.'
I brought a couple of people with me'
today in case I get hot questions later on,'
which I'm anticipating out of this crew here as I look out."
We have Sheila Dillon, chief of housing in the city of Boston,'
and Joyce Lenehan, chief of policy in the city of Boston'
who helped guide us with our plan, which'
I'm going to talk a little bit about this evening."
I want to say good evening to all the students'
that are here, the faculty, and guests,'
and I'm honored to join--
I looked up at the sheet a minute ago,'
and I saw the distinguished list of speakers'
who spoke here before me.
And I said, oh boy, what am I doing here, a kid from Dorch.'
So I'm going to do my best to keep you"
involved and interested here.
But it's also very, very exciting"
for me, especially in the memory of a man like John Dunlop.'
You heard a lot about him crossing over different lines'
from the university government to labor secretary,'
and sometimes that is easy and a natural transformation.'
Other times it's very difficult.
But certainly in his work in the Harvard Trade Union Program,'
he spent his career bringing people together,'
academic, government officials, workers, labor leaders,'
to better understand shared challenges.'
And those of you that are new starting out'
in this business, that's not always an easy thing."
Because you have people from coming'
from very different points of view,'
and when you get them at a table understanding'
that they really have a lot of things in common,'
it's a matter of how do you get to that common theme."
So I want-- I'm honored to be here."
If something we could use more today'
of in this world is an understanding and getting'
to yes.
I think too many times we don't have that."
I found these types of dialogue and collaboration'
to be invaluable throughout my career,'
whether it was in labor or as a state legislator'
or, certainly, in the mayor's office."
That's especially true as it pertains"
to the topic of this evening which is housing.'
I want to start talking briefly about my relationship'
between the housing and inequality,'
and it's a very strong relationship."
Home ownership is a major maker of wealth gaps,'
as rents disproportionately burdens lower income households'
even putting them in danger of displacement'
or even homelessness.
And we've seen that in my three years as mayor,"
we've even seen it in just my three years as mayor."
As you look around the city of Boston'
or look in the city of Cambridge,'
you look and see a lot of cranes,'
you see a lot of growth, a lot of wealth being made.'
But in those neighborhoods, you're seeing a lot of poverty,"
a lot of sadness, a lot of people being displaced.'
Our numbers of homelessness, which'
I'm going to talk about in a minute,"
even though we've been successful with getting"
a lot of people into a home, we're"
seeing those numbers grow every single day.'
The relationship between citywide, inequality,'
and housing is a bit more complex.'
But some of the income measures, Boston is among the most equal'
of cities.
We are working to change that, and that's something"
that bothers me every day.
But we want to do it a way that lifts people up,'
not just by the numbers.
Inequality metrics miss sometimes'
things about our city in Boston.
For example, consider the following numbers.'
19% of our housing units in the city of Boston'
are subsidized or low income.
That's higher than any major city"
nationwide as far as we can tell.'
A study by the Urban Institute in 2015'
looked at housing in the 100 most populated cities'
in America.
It found that Suffolk County, which is primarily'
the city of Boston has the highest'
ratio of affordable units compared to extremely'
low income renters.
We are also home to around 150,000 college and graduate'
students and nearly 40,000 of those students'
living off campus.
Many probably a vast majority of low incomes.'
Many of you in this room can confirm that.'
If these lower income populations couldn't live here,"
we might look like a more equal city.'
But we don't want to displace people from somewhere else."
We want to make sure people can and will achieve'
financial security right here.
And in any case, without public housing,'
universities would lose something,'
would lose our identity as a city.'
Would lose a big piece of that identity,'
and we wouldn't be the Boston that many of us love."
The biggest drivers of inequality'
are global forces and national policies.'
Our role in that national conversation'
is to educate people on the impacts of inequality'
and advocate for solutions.
Health care, paid family leave, and day care, strong labor'
laws, fair tax laws, financial regulations, infrastructure,'
those are the issues that I highlight'
when I get together with other mayors on a national platform.'
But locally our scope for action is better defined'
by mobility, the opportunity for people to get ahead in life'
and achieve their financial security.'
Mobility requires safe, affordable housing.'
It also requires high quality prekindergarten,'
grade 12 to K education, job training, transportation,'
open space, public safety, and small business opportunities.'
It's the framework that binds us together,"
all different issues tied up in housing and community'
development.
We are so we are also increasingly striving'
to integrate our policy work so our planning work reflects'
that in everything that we do in the city.'
The efforts move forward through a wide set of partnerships'
with other levels of government--'
with foundations, with nonprofits, with advocates,'
with businesses, and with developers.'
I want to share some experiences with those partnerships,'
because they have shaped my-- helped shaped my career,'
and because I think they are the key to moving'
urban policy forward.
Despite the challenges cities are presented'
with at this time and moment.
In 25 years or so, I've learned a lot about housing."
I've learned how to get it built, the roles that people"
play in working with it, the role it plays'
with community development.
I started out as a construction laborer out of college.'
Well, I, kind of, dropped out of college'
be a construction laborer and went back later.'
I also served as the president of my local union.'
Later, I became the head of the Boston Building Trades'
in the greater Boston area.
In that role, I negotiated project labor agreements'
for large and mixed use projects.'
Brought different types of developments for contractors'
to be able to deliver those services.'
I learned what it takes to get significant amounts of housing'
built. It was also not just assembling terms for workers'
in establishing their compensation,'
it was about making sure that the projects were'
done to high quality safety standards'
and were financially viable.
Ultimately it required forging productive partnerships'
among players whose interests are not perfectly aligned.'
Those players go beyond management and labor.'
They include abutters, neighborhood groups,'
state and local officials, sometimes federal officials,'
environmental agencies, affordable housing advocates,'
tenant rights groups, and everyone, kind of, in between.'
It can seem quite impossible at first'
trying to get all the different alignments on the same page.'
But you find common ground, and you build on that.'
You figure out how to make a project work for everybody.'
Representing workers, I was also closely engaged'
with the relation between jobs and housing.'
Jobs give people the ability manage their rents comfortably'
and invest in homes.
They can also contribute their time and talent'
to family to community and the whole spectrum'
of city life and civic life.
For example, we developed a program'
called Building Pathways to help low income'
people of color and women to get into building trades.'
One of my key partners in creating this program'
was the Boston Housing Authority.'
I did it two years before I became the mayor'
of the city of Boston.
We drew the participants from the public housing residents.'
Graduates now have options beyond public housing.'
Many of them have become homeowners.'
Many of them are saving to become homeowners.'
They're building housing at work,"
and they're living in connection between their income"
and housing access.
In 1997, I was elected state representative'
for the community where I grew up in Dorchester.'
As a legislator in an urban district,'
I got a deeper understanding of how communities value housing.'
For most homeowners, it's the foundation"
of their financial security.
But housing is more than an economic transaction.'
It's safety.
It's family.
It's a home.
That's what communities are for.
The patterns of housing in neighborhoods'
make up the sense of a place.
Changes that seem to threaten that identity'
can create tremendous insecurity.'
We shouldn't write off--
we shouldn't write off as right now as not"
in my backyard syndrome.
I consider myself privileged to have represented'
the community in Dorchester that saw'
affordable housing, supportive housing, sober'
housing, diversity at the core of the identity.'
That's a true neighborhood.
But the residents still have legitimate concerns'
about change, whether they're being treated fairly."
I found that a way a developer approaches a community process'
can make or break a proposal.
That true whether developers are private, nonprofit,'
or government agency.
There has to be an openness and a dialogue to start.'
And elected officials have to urge developers'
to embrace that dialogue, if they'
are to retain the trust of their constituents.'
In 2013, I was elected mayor of the city of Boston.'
One of the first things I was confronted with'
was more and more people were calling it a housing crisis.'
Rents and home prices were raising beyond middle class,'
working class, and low income people's budgets."
And when I was a state representative'
we had the foreclosure crisis in the Commonwealth,'
so we passed legislation to keep people in their home.'
So we're not in the midst of the foreclosure crisis right now,"
we're in the midst of a rising rent crisis right now"
and a lack of prod-- a lack of product on the line.'
I sat down with Sheila Dillon.
Sheila had previously worked on a plan for housing.'
And we talked about doing a deeper dive.'
We need to do a bigger plan, more inclusive plan.'
We have to look at middle class housing.'
We have to look at low income housing.'
We have to look at college housing.'
Students renting in apartments who many of you are doing it'
now are probably paying $1,000 for a room,'
and you have five roommates.
We're thinking how do we make it better?"
So in our housing plan, we calculated'
that we have to build 53,000 units by the year 2030'
to keep up with the pace that we were experiencing in 2014.'
It's a good thing we are ahead of pace,"
because the population is growing'
faster than we even thought.
But the challenge is more complex than simply'
matching housing units with the population'
or meeting the market driven demands.'
The challenge is to embrace our success as a city'
while retaining the core values that got us here.'
Those values center on inclusiveness, on opportunity,'
on social and economic diversity.'
We-- if you want some water, there's water here."
Please, help.
We are a community that welcomes all and leaves no one behind.'
These aren't just ideals, they are pragmatic needs."
I tell business leaders all the time, and they agree with me.'
We need housing for working people,'
so working people can afford, or we won't have"
enough workers for our economy.
And we need to secure a middle class'
to support civic life and small businesses'
in our neighborhoods.
So Boston's challenge is to protect the growing low income"
housing and our senior housing and to prevent and end'
homelessness and to create affordable--'
affordability for the working class'
and for the middle class, all while ensuring'
growth, which makes our communities more'
livable and likable.
These are goals that are not just'
straightforward as approaching development plans,'
they take a variety of resources and collaboration to unlock.'
That's why our housing plan is more than numbers."
To begin with, it broke out that numbers into targets'
for each income area.
Just as important, it laid out a set of strategies'
how we reach these goals in these different areas.'
And more than that, it created a platform'
to bring different players together'
who could forge new partnerships and strategies to meet'
those various needs.
In other words, it called the city'
to that dialogue, incorporation I talked about earlier with all'
the different people.
Here's what it looks like in practice."
We changed our inclusionary development policy'
to require more affordable housing'
from developers of medium and large scale developments.'
It took a lot of conversations to make'
sure we didn't discourage development,"
and we kept an incentive to build affordable units on site'
to push back against economic segregation.'
We joined a coalition to work together'
and advocates to persuade Boston voters to adopt the Community'
Preservation Act.
It's a property tax surcharge to support housing access"
to open space and historic preservation.'
We tried it in 2001, and it fails.'
We came back in 2016, and it passed with nearly 75%'
of the vote from Boston voters.
A strong endorsement that's needed"
for more affordable housing in the city,'
and the ability to create it.
And it showed that our residents in the city'
understand the need for us to build more affordable housing.'
We also got funding from the Bloomberg foundation'
to create what's called the Housing Innovation Lab."
This team has developed pilot programs'
for accessory dwellings also known as in-law apartments.'
It is toward model compact units around the city'
to get input about how they might'
fit into a fabric of different neighborhoods.'
We advanced community planning projects'
along the transit corridors to increase density'
in areas that needed development where'
we had good public transit.
We're formed the Boston Housing Authority--"
excuse f me, the Boston Re-development Authority'
and renamed it the Boston Planning and Development'
Agency.
And it wasn't just simply a name."
It was that we were doing development,'
but we really weren't planning out a community."
And now what we're doing is planning our community"
as we do development.
And we've taken steps to address displacement,"
one of the biggest challenges in our city.'
We created the Office of Housing Stability'
to support tenants and work with landlords to prevent evictions.'
We also put forth five pieces of anti-displacement legislation'
at the state house tied to the Community Stabilization'
Act, which I filed in the city council.'
It will help protect tenants from evictions and homeowners'
facing foreclosure.
The Harvard research or Matthew Desmond'
has been influential in taking on this issue.'
He said, eviction to a black woman'
is what incarceration is to a black men'
in the terms of limiting opportunity and inflicting'
trauma on the whole family.
It's another window into the role of housing."
Not just in community development,'
but in human development.
The results so far have been pretty heartening for us.'
We've gotten nearly 20,000 units of that 53,000 units"
either built or in under construction.'
It's taken the pressure off existing housing"
stock where working families live bringing the average rents'
down by 4% last year.
We also set a record of production,'
producing thousands of units of low income housing.'
We invested $100 million over the last three years'
in affordable housing projects.
That's city money.
Our new inclusionary requirement calls for another $45 million'
from recent project approvals alone.'
And we expect another $20 million from the CPA this year.'
It all won't go into housing, but it'll"
be spread into those three buckets.'
We've also taken on homelessness like never before."
We've built a new 400 bed shelter"
in the heart of our city.
That's after we had to close down what was called the Long"
Island Bridge.
Those of you that aren't from here,"
we have a bridge out to Long Island, which'
is in the Boston Harbor, where in the morning'
we would take our homeless folks from the bridge on a bus'
and drop them off in town, and at night'
we picked them up on a bus and bring them back out'
to Long Island.
And what that made us do after we'
had to close the bridge because the bridge was literally'
collapsing into the ocean, it really'
forced us to take a good hard look'
at how we are treating our homeless population,'
and what are we doing?
And for all intensive purposes, we'
were housing our homeless population,'
and we didn't really have a plan to get"
a pathway into home owner-- not home'
ownership into an apartment, and eventually into home ownership.'
So we made this one of the cornerstones of our new housing'
first system to get people into housing with supports'
they need to stay housed.
We have housed roughly 1000, 1100 chronically homeless'
individuals since July 4--
July 2014.
[APPLAUSE]
In 2015, Michelle Obama challenge cities around America'
to end chronic veterans homelessness.'
We sat down in a room, WE talked about it,'
and we said this is a pretty daunting task.'
The first thing, we didn't have the exact number"
of homeless vets we had on the street,'
but we took the challenge up anyway.'
And by the end of that year, we started the year'
with 450 roughly chronically homeless veterans.'
By the end of that year, we had housed 551'
chronically homeless veterans.
So we were able to end chronic veterans homelessness'
in the city of Boston, and we're also"
able to put veterans on a path within six months'
into a home themself working with all of our partners.'
That's something that's important."
Our role-- our goal to end chronic homelessness'
in the city of Boston is by the end of next year.'
However, as I said earlier in the beginning of this speech'
that we constantly see more and more people'
coming into our system here in the city of Boston'
every single day.
So we're going to be working with our state"
partners and our other cities and towns'
around the Commonwealth to make sure'
that they're doing their part as well, because it can't just"
be one city doing this work.
It has to be all 351 cities and towns in the Commonwealth.'
We also know we have a long way to go to make housing'
truly accessible to all.
But the dialogue and the collaboration'
and the creativity that have unlocked proven keys'
to making real progress.
And that will be even more true as we move forward.'
The phase of my career I can close with'
is one that just started, being mayor'
during a new reality with the federal government.'
The white-- I heard a couple of chuckles.'
We can laugh.
Any press here, you can write that down.'
The White House has announced its intention'
to pull federal support from public housing,'
from rental vouchers, from home ownership programs,'
from fuel assistance, from community block grants.'
Looking at these proposed cuts reveals all over again'
how much housing is interwoven with so much else.'
One thing I want to say, and we had a press conference'
last week to talk about the budget,'
was in the budget there's two areas that I gave credit"
to the administration on.
One was increased funding veterans,'
and one was increased funding to fight the opiate addiction.'
But if you don't have the ability for rental vouchers,"
public housing, home ownership programs, fuel assistance,'
block grants, you're not doing a service to our veterans, men"
and women in this country.
Something that I want you to keep in the back of your head.'
Prior administrations have helped'
leverage the support through wider partnerships'
that I've discussed.
But we've seen the reductions in these kinds"
of proposals that are happening right now, proposed right now.'
These cuts would bring many of these complex fundings'
arrangements to a halt. It's an effort"
to end the system of federal partnerships'
that date back to the New Deal and the Great Society'
Commitments of the 1930s to the 60s'
without replacing them with any new concept'
of national progress.
But despite all this, I am still confident.'
With the work I described above, we'
put ourselves in a position to respond at this very moment.'
Even if the funding arrangements we have seen threatened,'
the relations we've built have been very strong."
They will produce new solutions for new ideas.'
They will bring new partnerships to the table,'
and I've noticed that forums like this, the United"
States of conference--
The US Conference of Mayors where'
we sit down and talk about the challenges'
that we have in the cities.
You would be-- you would be surprised'
how closely aligned the red states'
and the blue states are whose mayors come from those states'
and those cities.
I hear it in meetings with the CEOs.'
I hear it in the meetings with tech leaders,'
hospital presidents, university presidents.'
They may not all vote the same way on election day,'
but they understand that the threat being'
posed by Boston's economy and to their employers well-being."
Boston is gearing up for a fight on a national level'
to make sure we continue to fight for the people that'
need us to fight for them.
This sense of urgency will speed up our progress'
in developing new partnerships with new solutions,'
taking regional planning as an example.'
Boston's economy is not a Boston economy,"
it's a regional economy.
Our housing market is a regional market.'
But those affordable housing numbers I cited earlier'
are not shared across our region.'
We need to share these responsibly and more evenly.'
We need to give people opportunities'
to live in different neighborhoods as well.'
That means working through the state legislative process'
and working directly with cities and towns'
across the Commonwealth.
We've already built a strong foundation"
in economic development partnerships,'
and that's an easy one.
We all want to bring business to our communities,'
we all want to bring jobs to our communities,'
we all want to bring growth to our communities,'
but we have to share in the housing market'
as well with our communities.
We can no longer compete against our neighbors'
in Cambridge and Somerville.
We need to work with them.
One final piece of this dialogue in collaboration'
is the new era of motivation in this room.'
I hope it inspires talented students'
to go into public service and housing advocacy.'
We're going to need you in the years ahead."
I know some of you are already studying in our neighborhoods'
and even at city hall.
I want to thank you for your interest and your commitment'
in our city, and I want to thank you'
for your commitment and interest in this important issue.'
Our city wide plan, Imagine Boston 2030,'
identifies major opportunities for equitable, sustainable'
growth from beacon yards in Austin'
to Widett Circle to Readville and Hyde Park.'
I probably won't be mayor by the time Imagine Boston 2030 gets"
off the grounds, but it's also important"
that we're going to continue to move forward,"
because you are the future.
Many of you young people in this room'
are the future of our city.
I look forward to seeing many of you'
down the road at conferences and construction sites,'
and I look forward to hearing from your questions right now.'
And I just want to thank you.
The last thing I want to say on a personal note.'
I got into this business of politics,'
because I love giving back and helping people.'
And there's an opportunity here that I have every single day."
The housing plan that I talked about, the work that I'
talked about is not about me.
It's about a team of people that sit that care about it."
And I want to just pass along to you, a lot of you in this room.'
Whatever your focus, whatever your dreams are, follow'
those dreams and follow your focus.'
If housing is your passion, whatever side of it is on,'
get involved.
Because that's where you can make a tremendous impact"
in people's life.
As I said earlier, I got into this business to help people.'
I didn't realize, I got into this business 20 years ago."
I got elected April of 1997.
When I first ran for office, I wouldn't imagine 20 years later"
working on a housing plan, figuring out'
about displacement, building low income housing, moderate income'
housing to keep people in a home and give people'
the opportunity to have financial stability'
and security.
So you just don't know which way life's going to go."
So I want to thank you for being here today,'
and I look forward to your questions.'
[APPLAUSE]
Thank you, Mr. Mayor.
So the mayor has graciously accepted'
to take questions for a while, and so we'll"
have some microphones in the room.'
So please when you raise your hand, look for a microphone.'
Identify who you are, your affiliation, and remember'
a question is not usually several paragraphs long,'
and does end in a question mark.
So is there any questions for the mayor?'
Yes, right here.
This woman right here.
There we go.
Hello, my name is [INAUDIBLE] McCree.'
I'm a student at Harvard Business School."
So my question to you is for developers'
that are developing in these communities,'
do you ask them for concessions in their rent, or is it'
more that you're relying on market forces"
to drive down rents.
I don't know-- I don't ask for concessions."
We try-- it depends--
It really depends upon the units of housing.'
So for example, when we're trying"
to build affordable housing in the city of Boston,'
we'll try and use city only.
And if we can, we'll try and get good rates if we can."
We'll use some of the inclusionary development money"
from other developments that might be in town that they're"
not going to do the on site.
Inclusionary development, if you build affordable site it's 13%."
If you go off-site, it's 18%.
So it gives us some additional money.'
It's really difficult to ask people to lower their rates,"
because you want people to make a living wage.'
And you don't want to be going into them saying,"
you've got to drop your rate.
Because there's a minimum wage in the city of Boston,"
but we also have a living wage, which is a little higher,'
I believe, than the minimum wage.'
And then we have construction rates, unions in Boston'
as well, so we have a little bit of a mix of everybody.'
But there's a big mix of housing in Boston."
There's all different types of development styles"
of construction.
It really is how do you put the deal together.'
I think what's going to be more complicated as we move forward"
here in the future is that the state will give some subsidies,'
the federal government gives them subsidies.'
I'm concerned that we're going to start to see those go away"
where it's going to be really reliant upon the city,"
and how do we put together a subsidy that'
can offset some of the state credits'
and the federal credits that are out there.'
That's where, I think, we're going"
to run into some problems.
Right now, some of the buildings-- builders'
in the room, I mean, the cost of construction is high,'
the cost of material's high.
And I think that that's one of the things"
that I don't think we'll ever see come down, because there's"
so much demand right now.
There's so much construction in the pipeline."
Up the back.
Thank you for your talk.
My name is Andrea.
I'm a student here at the GSD.
My question is, how do you balance'
the need for more housing in Boston'
with the potential impacts of climate change on the city?'
That's a great question.
In our-- In our imag-- in our Imagine Boston 2030 Plan,'
it really talks about-- we have outlines,'
we have maps inside that plan that talk about what'
some of the flood zones that we have coming potentially'
in the city of Boston over the course of next 50, 100 years.'
We have some real smart housing going on in the city of Boston.'
We have some projects in Roxborough'
is out there, very green project with using renewable materials.'
Really we don't have 100% plan, though, right?"
We don't have one that we force 100% renewable"
and clean energy.
So we haven't gone that far yet in the city of Boston,"
but we try to encourage developers to use as much--'
build as much to protect the environment as possible.'
I think that some of our--
the impacts of the climate are really some of our large scale'
development.
Most of our-- most of our large scale development'
is along the waterway.
A lot of area that we have for additional housing,'
moderate, low income housing, is in the heart of the city.'
So they're protected from rising sea tide,"
but a lot of our high end housing is right on the ocean.'
So that's really some of the-- some"
of the challenges we're going to have in the future."
I mentioned Widett Circle.
Widett Circle is an incredible opportunity'
for growth of the city of Boston right now.'
It's a train yard.
The problem with Widett Circle that it's in a flood zone."
So as developers look to build in the future,'
they have to start planning out how do they'
build a project that's able to sustain a rising sea"
tide of up seven feet over the course of the next 100 years.'
So it's a complicated situation.
But we don't have rules right now on our one,"
two, three family homes.
The force that it's a 100% environmentally friendly."
Right here.
Thank you for a talk.
I'm Dr. [INAUDIBLE] from [INAUDIBLE] Harvard Medical"
School.
I wanted to hear your view on automation'
and the implications of automation'
in housing, economic growth, and accessibility,'
mobility specifically?
And what's the role of mayor there?"
What can you do, and what do you see the changes will be?'
Will you explain that automation for me?'
Automation and driving.
Automated driving, basically.
Oh, oh, like autonomous vehicles.'
Autonomous vehicles, yes.
We're going to--
Transportation.
We're going to a plan right now for autonomous vehicles."
I think, first of all, automation'
is the future, obviously.
We know that.
I think that one of our biggest challenges'
that we have in this city is automation as far as vehicles,'
and how do we move forward.
We're seeing in the city of Boston--"
and this is where the neighbor comes into play--'
we're seeing in the city of Boston"
where somebody will put in a proposal'
into the Boston Planning and Development Agency'
to build 300 units of housing.
And they'll put it-- and they'll be near a train"
station or a bus route.
And you'll see the parking sometimes will"
start at 0.5 spots per unit.
And the community will say we want two spots per unit.'
And there's that natural battle.
When in reality is they probably need 0.5 parking spaces, not'
two parking spaces, but how do you get to that point?'
So I think that over time it will change.'
I think we're still seeing--
this is-- I see a big generational gap.'
There's a lot of young people in this room that"
don't own the car, probably don't have your license,"
and you're probably in your 20s.
And when I was growing up, you got your license the day after,'
and every house had about seven cars in there.'
So there's a generational change here"
that's happening, occurring very slowly."
We are very involved with autonomous vehicles.'
We have a pilot program going on now down the South Boston'
waterfront.
We're partnering with the state.
But I also think that we have to make'
major investments in our infrastructure'
as far as public transit.
I think that we are--most of our public transit is feeding off'
of diesel.
We have to prepare not just for the current transit system now,'
but we also the plan it for the future'
is going to be the electric system.'
So I think that it's all still playing out."
I think we're in the transition period"
as we are right now, and in 2017.'
I think we're going to see great gains, though,"
in the next four or five years.
We're in the process right now in the city of Boston,"
we were able to negotiate an agreement with Verizon'
to bring fiber optic cable throughout the entire city'
of Boston.
When I talked about that, everyone in this room'
will get excited about it.
But if I talk about it at a senior building'
or a civic association meeting, people aren't as excited about."
Because they're not understanding"
that that's the growth of a city that can happen with that."
What with that-- I know this isn't your question,"
but what happened with that in Kansas City'
when Google came in and wired the entire city of Kansas City.'
I was talking to the mayor there,'
Sly James, and once he did that, all these companies were'
moving to Kansas City, coming into the city.'
With that comes growth.
So we have to think about how do we stay ahead of that growth.'
Yes?
Hi, my name is Claribelle Santiago, and I live in Boston.'
My question is in the Imagine Boston 2030,'
you have your promises, your economic promises,'
but your indexes don't have the--"
it doesn't have the outcomes of what you are proposing."
So the storytelling from the community is not in there.'
It's only your promise and the city plans."
No, none it's mine.
It's all the community.
I don't have an opinion on Imagine Boston 2030 meeting."
It's not my plan.
It's the city's plan.
And I'll have to check-- afterwards we"
can grab Joyce Linehan.
We can check into that for you.
OK.
But everything built off Imagine Boston 2030,'
just like Go Boston 2030, which is our planning.'
Let me just back up.
I'll come back to that.
But are you going to have an index in there.'
It should be in there.
I'm not sure if it is.
Or a dashboard or something to, what's been"
done before and after stories.
Because Boston has a history which is very, very new'
30 years of racial issues.
So I would like to see that in there, the inclusionary.'
OK, let me just back up.
Sure.
2014, I got elected mayor of the city of Boston.'
We started looking at different areas of the government.'
We looked at transportation, and we'
launched a program called Go Boston 2030, which was a master'
planning of transportation and talking'
about the future of transportation'
was autonomous vehicles, public transportation,'
walking bicycling, all the different modes'
of transportation.
We had about 7,000 people that came out'
of the farms across the city of Boston'
to have their input put into this plan.'
We launched it-- launched it the other day, the plan.'
The plan is not my plan and the plan is not the transportation'
department plan and the plan is not the public works plan.'
The plan is a plan that came from the community.'
We then created-- this is what we did,'
kind of, all at the same time.
Then we looked at arts and culture'
and realized that we really haven't had an arts and culture"
play in the city probably ever.
So we launched a plan called Boston Creates where'
people sat down small and large artists'
from different organizations and people,'
and they came up with a plan on what they'
wanted to see in the art space, the arts community.'
Imagine Boston 2030 started and within that plan'
we have environment, transportation.'
We have every aspect of civic life'
and cultural life in the city of Boston.'
And that plan has been drawn up by consultants'
in the city going out listening to the community'
to see what they want to see in the city of Boston.'
And what they want to see their city'
looked like in the year 2030 and beyond.'
This isn't about what I want to see,"
what the vision I have for Dudley Square.'
This is about what the people in Dudley square'
have a vision for their community.'
So all of the stuff that you're talking about,"
the racial stuff--
we'll-- that's a lot deeper.
I don't know what you mean by that in the plan."
But we're talking about the development of our city,"
and what the city should look like in the future.'
All of that is on a website, Imagine Boston 2030.'
All of the index should be on the website,'
all the backup material should be'
on the website, and everything that we have'
is very transparent on there.
So I'm not sure where--
if it's down the day you looked at it,"
but all that information is on there.'
And we're in the drafting phase now."
So we're still not complete with it."
We're in the next phase of still taking comment on it."
Yes?
Hi, my name is Gabby.
I'm an undergraduate, wow, at Harvard College."
And you mentioned briefly in your talk'
about that not in my backyard phenomenon,'
where people support affordable housing theoretically, but may'
have concerns about having it in their neighborhood.'
And I was wondering in terms of those concerns'
with people wondering about, like, the changes'
in their neighborhood, what the most prominent concerns you've"
seen are, and how you address those concerns when'
you discussing this with neighborhoods?'
The biggest push back I get is density and traffic.'
That's what everyone talks about, density and traffic."
I'm not sure if that's actually the issue that's"
going on at the time, but they say density and traffic.'
And we try to work with those communities.'
We're building more housing now than probably almost"
any other period in the history of the city.'
So we have a lot of development going on.'
So there's a lot of change going on,"
and I think some people get concerned'
about their neighborhood changing.'
I think people are concerned about gentrification.'
They are concerned about their Main Street areas'
and not fully looking at the whole picture'
that sometimes this actually improve'
your Main Street by bringing more people into the community.'
So there's a lot of concerns.
There's a lot of concerns that people have in different areas."
I know that--
I can go all around the city and tell you some'
of the concerns people have.
In areas like Codman Square in Dorchester,'
predominantly African-American, Cape Verdean American.'
People are tired of low income housing.'
They're like we don't want anymore low income housing,"
we want moderate income housing.
We want to build up opportunities'
around the Fermont Line for job creation'
and support our retailers.
So we have different-- there's different concern"
in every neighborhood.
Nobody's the-- no one neighborhood's consistent."
In Jamaica Plain, we just had a big round about,'
about-- we launch these what's called"
growth zones in the city.
And we look at two areas of the city, the first two'
areas of the city in the city of Boston.'
One was in South Boston between the Andrew State'
Corridor and the Broadway Station Corridor'
on the left hand side of Dorch Avenue,'
if you're familiar with it.
It's basically industrial area right now."
So we brought the community in and they sat down'
and they talked about what they wanted to see there.'
And, obviously, a of it's housing."
But what they did, they create a whole neighborhood there.'
And what they were able to do, street scrape--'
street scape new streets, parks.
Be able to build it out how they want to see it'
in the next 10, 15, 20 years.
In Jamaica Plain, a little different.'
We already had a lot of development there.'
We had a lot of manufacturing, and what we're trying to do"
there is come up with an idea of as this'
gets redeveloped into housing, what do we want to see there?'
And there was an organization, one organization was trying'
to get 70% affordable housing there,'
which isn't going to work, because it"
was private investment.
And what we're trying to do is preserve affordable housing"
in the neighborhood ironically.
So we get to a point where it was going to be, I think,'
30% affordable housing in that neighborhood where'
any new development will have a component of up to 30%'
affordable housing there.
So we're preserving affordable housing in that area."
If we didn't do that growth zone in Jamaica Plain, what"
would have happened was that each development would come in,'
the developed would come into the neighborhood,'
try and work the neighborhood down,'
and say I will build 13% off-site somewhere or 18%'
off-site somewhere, and I want to build all high end'
housing here.
Which is what's happened in a lot of areas."
So we've gone back and forth, and again in that case"
we had a pro development group, kind of,'
arise out of the community from the neighborhood.'
So now we have competing interests in the community.'
And really what we're doing with the growth zones"
in some areas that are underdeveloped'
area, industrial area, how do we build those out?'
How do we build more housing?
In areas that have housing stock there, how do we make sure'
we preserve affordable housing in those neighborhoods?'
So the growth zones are different as you'
look around the city.
There's no consistent line.
Yes?
Once, yeah.
Gentlemen and then up front.
Hi, I'm Owen.
I'm a high school student Cambridge"
I always wonder how you balance the need and the desire'
for affordable housing with the need to attract development'
into the future, and how you, kind of, manage'
that issue going forward.
I think it's just natural.
I mean, we need affordable housing'
because future employers in the city of Boston need workers.'
And I think if there's a workforce that's"
in within the city limits, it's able too--"
they're able to supply jobs.
They're able to supply the-- fill"
the jobs that are out there.
And I think that's something that's important."
There's also a component of this of working education wise."
We're working with Roxbury Community College,"
MassBay Community College, Bunker Hill Community College'
to offer free college tuition for high school seniors'
that graduate Boston public schools at a 3.0, 2.0 GPA.'
And then we're working with BU that once they graduate,"
they go to BU to finish their degree.'
They have to hit requirements, but with a 15--'
less than $15,000 in debt.
So what we're doing is building the housing,"
but we're also trying to strengthen the education"
opportunities, and we're also working with Creating Pathways"
as college-- high school graduates'
into coll-- pathway into college, pathway into a career.'
So it's all happ-- it's not just one piece,"
it all works together.
And I think in the future one of the biggest concerns'
that people have with the president's ban on the refugees"
is that it's limiting the amount of people that"
can come into this country to fill some of the tech jobs'
that are out there.
So we clearly don't have enough people"
within our own country to fill all the jobs out there,'
and by creating more opportunities for housing--'
more stable opportunities for housing'
that has to be wrapped around with good transit system.'
That has be wrapped around a good educational system.'
That has be wrapped around good, safe communities.'
So all of that.
It's not just one piece, it's all the pieces together."
There's a young woman in the front."
I was really interested-- hi, I'm"
Kate O'Gorman, Kennedy School student here."
I was curious about your comments'
about needing, kind of, the region to also take'
a share in this burden.
And I was curious as to some of your strategies to, kind of,'
bring your regional counterparts along with you'
as you're looking into this new vision,"
and some of the questions you're asking yourself on that."
No, thank you.
One of the-- one of the things we'
did when first got in as well, sat down mayors from Cambridge,'
from Somerville, from Chelsea, from Braintree,'
from Quincy on the red line, and we'
talked about creating what's called a Red Line Corridor."
And that's collaboration.
Trying to bring new tech companies into the Red Line'
Corridor.
That means if Boston gets a company or Braintree gets'
a company or Quincy gets a company or Cambridge gets'
a company, we shouldn't be in competition with each other."
We should be building up a collaboration'
along the red line.
The red line connects us all.
So that's an easy marriage to have."
Everyone's, obviously, for economic development"
bringing new companies and new employment opportunities.'
But when it comes to housing, low income'
housing, affordable housing, you can't have one city do it."
It has to be more than one city.
We have to look around and look at other cities'
around the greater Boston area to make sure'
that they have their percentage of affordable housing'
as well to give people the opportunities'
to live in those neighborhoods.
And I used to laugh at the state house.'
I would-- we'd be fighting for 40B, it's a state house,"
and all of my dear friends-- progressive dear friends'
we'd be fighting for all the issues of recovery"
issues and mental health issues, but when'
it came to housing all of us said,'
well, let's talked about that.
And we really have to spread that around.'
And I'm not saying spread it around"
to get people out of Boston.
I'm saying spread it around to give people the opportunity"
to live in other areas, not just Boston.'
If you have the means in this room'
to be able to buy a house in Boston,'
you have the means to buy a house in Braintree,'
you have the means to potentially buy'
a house in Newton and Wellesley and wherever you want to live.'
People who are living poor and low income'
and depend upon a housing voucher or a section 8 voucher'
to live somewhere, they don't have that same opportunity."
They have to live where they're put."
Of they have to live in an area--'
they have a very small area to choose from.'
So what I'm suggesting-- and with the homeless--"
with the homelessness as well.
It's let's truly be and inclusive greater Boston area."
So we give opportunities for housing'
for everyone in your different neighborhoods,'
and I think that that's an important piece."
It's not about saying we won't put poor in Boston."
I'm proud of the fact that we have people living in Boston--"
low income families in Boston.
I want to keep them in Boston.
I don't want them to move out of Boston."
What makes us special, and what allows me to stand up'
at a microphone fighting back the immigration stop'
and fighting back the cuts to the budget'
is that we're a city made up of immigrants."
We're a city made up of rich and poor people."
We're a city made up of black and white people."
We're a city made up everybody, and we live"
and we move forward as a city.
And people talk about how great Boston is as a city.'
We are great city, and we're a great city not because"
of the leadership in the city.
We're a great city, because the people that live in the city."
And we want to be able to take what we have in Boston'
and spread it around the greater Boston area and possibly'
the Commonwealth.
I think we need to do more of that.'
[APPLAUSE]
Hi, Mayor Walsh.
Gary Hildebrand, a landscape architect'
and on the design faculty here.
I'm going to violate Chris's rule"
and offer a comment rather than a question.'
But I've been reflecting on Matt Kiefer's opinion piece"
in yesterday's Globe, which praised your effort to plan"
in the city.
By citing the fact that Boston hasn't"
had a planning effort of this kind since the late 50s.'
Yeah, a couple of years ago.
What we've had-- what we've had--"
what we've witnessed, I think, many of us in the room"
have seen this, but I think it's maybe not"
so known to the students in the room'
that Boston has been going, kind of, block by block and project'
by project to negotiate, but without the big sense'
that the vision 2030 plan brings.'
And I just want to say that many of us'
are grateful that you've done this effort."
No, thank you for that.
And the 2030 plan, the difference between the 2030'
plan and the 1950 plan.
The 50 was a great plan, because what came out of the 50s plan'
was the downtown skyline.
And there's a lot of great economic development,"
if you like to build tall buildings,'
and I happen to do in the city of Boston.'
The 2030 plan is going to be a moving document.'
It's going to be a living, breathing document."
And there's going to be-- it's going to be housed, I believe,"
at the end of the day at the Boston Planning and Development'
Agency.
And the document's going to change over time."
And | think that with the woman asked about the environment'
on housing, we've made tremendous gain"
in environmental protections in this country.'
And Boston's been ranked number one in a energy efficient city"
in America two years in a row.
And certainly what's coming out of Washington"
is bothering to some of us.
We're still going to continue to move forward."
We've to be carbon zero by the year 2050,"
but depending on what happens in the rest of the country,'
we're going to be able to make adjustments"
in that plan dealing with the environmental actions of what's"
happening with the environment.
Transportation, if the autonomous vehicles actually'
do happen in the Commonwealth and in the country,'
and we have autonomous vehicles here in the next 20 years,'
30 years, however long it is, we're"
going to be able to make adjustments and changes.'
If we find a different way to deliver public transportation,'
I'm not a scientist and I'm not an engineer,"
but I'm thinking what a great way would"
be to have solar panels on top of tunnel caps'
and using solar panels to power the trains going to the city'
and around America, but here in Boston.'
So all of that's going to be fluid."
It's going to change over time.
And the document is meant to give an opinion of people,'
but it's also meant to change over time."
And that's what we're going to do with that."
Before I take another question, I just want to make sure.'
I'm thinking the fact that I said we have $100 million"
in city money, it's city money and is it IDP money?"
IDP money in inclusionary development?'
Yep, and linkage.
And linkage, OK so it wasn't $100 million"
from taxpayers' money.
It was $100 million from tax--
a combination of taxpayers' money, developers money,"
and linkage money, which is developers money.'
So thank you developers.
Mr Mayor, I know that you may have another constraint.'
Do you have time for one more question?'
I'll take a couple more.
OK.
There's one right here and one right here."
All right.
Any out back, did we miss you up there.'
I can't see you.
OK, we'll get three more.
One, two, three how's that?
Going down the back.
All right, thanks for taking the time.'
Avan O'Connor, a planning student here at the GSD."
You started to touch on it a bit in response'
to the question about nimbyism in the city,'
but given the efforts you've taken"
to create more of a dialogue around race'
and traditional divisions that have taken place in Boston,'
how is that feeding into some of your housing goals,'
and what kind of behavior change would you expect'
on the ground from the city.
Great question.
I think that we haven't been able to dive in that"
deeply yet as far as making impact'
on the conversation on race.
We've had dialogues.
We've had conversations.
Right now in the midst of training'
facilitators to be able to come out and have'
those dialogues in every community in the neighborhood.'
So I don't think we can necessarily take credit yet"
for those conversations fully.
I'm looking at Joyce just to get a nod of yes or no"
across the board.
I think the nimbyism part of it is based on race.'
Part of it's based on just that people don't want development."
I think part of it's based on fear, growth, change."
When I launched the housing plan people'
though it was a great idea.
And now I hear people complaining about me'
in neighborhoods saying he's building too much,"
because they see so many cranes.
And they're confusing some of the cranes in downtown Boston"
as I'm building housing there, I'm"
building housing in the communities.'
We're building in neighborhoods that really haven't"
seen development before.
There's housing units going up in Roxbury"
and Mattapan and Dorchester.
And Southie, obviously, has been pretty popular'
for a long time in Charlestown and areas'
like that have been popular.
But we're getting housing projects now"
in developments-- housing growth in neighborhoods that haven't"
had growth in 20, 30 years.
So I think people are people who are just'
concerned about change.
And change is good for a community.'
It is good for a community.
I'm not saying displace everyone in the community."
I'm talking that type of change.
I'm talking adding more people living into a neighborhood's"
a good thing.
Mayor Walsh, thank you for coming tonight.'
My name is Andrew Kern.
I'm a master's student here in the Real Estate Development"
Program.
My question for you is does your administration'
plan to enact a subsidization plan'
or provide zoning exemptions for privately developed student'
housing?
If so, what restrictions would you'
put on developers of student housing to ease your concerns?'
That's a pretty interesting question."
One of our parts of our plan is to encourage on campus housing.'
That's the first answer to that.
We are not opposed to having private developers build'
housing.
I don't think we can offer credits for it,"
but I think what will do is work with them to look and see'
is there an opportunity if they build a mixed use development'
and put housing on it, they're going to make money"
by building the housing from the students living there.'
Is that what you mean by the question?'
Yes or encourage students to having'
private developers having built student houses for them'
specifically?
Or
Oh, yeah I would love--
Because a lot of universities successful university'
struggle to build in very dense increments.'
Yeah, I know.
I've met with several developers that want to build."
I don't think we have any in the construction yet or discuss,"
but we have had many developers coming'
in wanting to build student housing for a college'
or for a couple of colleges.
And we're not going to give them special zoning rights."
They'd have to go to community like anyone else,"
but we would encourage the community'
to support that type of housing.
So you get places like Suffolk University,'
Northeastern University who don't have a lot of land"
to build on anymore.
Maybe Boston University still owns'
a pretty decent amount of land.
So as the colleges-- in Wentworth-- as the colleges'
look to expand, and we encourage them'
to have 100% of their students on campus by the year 2030.'
We're asking them to do that.
Working with them to work with private developers,'
so that the smaller colleges that don't have the ability"
to build on campus.
So we're constantly very open to that idea."
We have been very open to that idea.'
We've worked through some of the ideas of who's"
going to police those units.
How is this structure going to use when it's a--"
when it's a private building housing"
students from x college or two colleges,'
how would they handle the students inside there?'
Do they treat them like it's a dorm life, because it's"
undergraduate housing.
Graduate housing's a little different,"
and so we've worked through all of those challenges"
about how it would work.
Now it's a matter of getting a developer"
to actually go forward.
I think we have two or three proposals that'
are being presented in front of the city right now.'
Yeah, I mean, I encourage that.
Absolutely.
Yes, sir.
Thank you so much for your lecture.'
My name's Adam Tanaka and I'm a planning student here."
And I had a question about the middle class'
component of your housing plan.
So how are you defining middle class, how are you funding it,'
and how do you justify that in the context of low income'
housing need?
Thanks.
It's about 50,000 to--
50,000 to 120,000 individual family.'
We're funding it.
It's all private development, but we're"
talking with private developers to build it themselves.'
We're not giving them subsidized units."
These aren't subsidized units.
What we're trying to do is use city-owner land,"
state-owned land.
The governor now and the governor's,"
the states involved in this and trying'
to get the land cost at the right price'
so we can move them forward.
So we're trying to be creative on how"
we build this type of housing.
As I said, I was the head of the building trades'
for a couple of years here.
In 2011 to 2013, we had very little interest'
in middle class housing in the city'
of Boston, large scale middle class'
housing in the city of Boston.
People were building in the suburbs.'
I became mayor in 2014, and we were'
getting a lot more interest now in developers actually coming'
into Boston building middle class housing.'
Today, I met with a met with a-- met'
with a company that owns $25 billion'
of assets in the United States of America.'
They build anything from big buildings in town'
down to small buildings.
And they were talking about getting into the middle class'
housing market, and they're looking"
to acquire some companies that are in that market,'
because they see an ability.
They don't see a return on investment"
as large as some of the big stuff,'
but they see a consistent return on investment,'
if they get the capacity to be able to build enough.'
So we're starting to see developers play in this area."
Before we had a handful of developers like WIN,'
but now we're seeing more and more people--"
and you see this--
we're seeing more and more developers starting to say, oh,"
there's something here.
And the housing can be built. I mean it can be built.'
There's no question about it.
The cost of construction is high,'
but again it's what the cost of the land is."
Mr. Mayor, do you have time for one last question'
from a faculty member.
Thank you very much.
My name is Mike Hooper, a teacher at the GSD.'
I was very interested in what you'
were saying about thinking of the city as a region'
and housing in terms of equitable housing'
across the region, also the sustainability of the city'
in a regional perspective.
And yet at the same time I was reading about the MBTA's plan"
for sharp reduction in service of commuter rail'
service across the region.
So we're talking about exciting new modes of transportation,"
autonomous vehicles, etc.
And yet it seems like a struggle to maintain'
just regular service across the region.'
How does this proposed cut in in MBTA service'
affect this idea of a equitably housed city region?'
I think it's a problem.
I think that any time you cut a service back there's"
a reason for it.
Obviously, not enough people are taking on the weekends.'
But I think there's a problem marketing as well."
I think people don't feel that it's necessarily"
reliable, dependable.
And I think for a city like Boston,'
we are a seven day a week city.
We certainly are a six day a week city,'
and to have that line cut off coming into the city of Boston,'
it's going to have an economic impact on the city."
It's going to have economic impacts on the system as well."
And I think that we have to look at transportation,'
public transportation rather than limit it,'
I think you expand it.
I think we have to look at doing a long, we had the late night--'
late night service here for a while in the city of Boston,'
and there was a partnership with the city and the state'
and private industry, and people took it.'
Now it might not have had the ridership of 7--'
5 o'clock on a Wednesday afternoon,"
but we have to provide opportunities.'
If we're going to-- if I'm going to get up here and talk"
about public transportation and getting around the city'
and not taking a car and using other modes of transportation,'
one of those modes has to be public.'
It can't just be bikes and people walking,"
so we have to work more with the state to try and encourage them'
to expand service, not cut back service.'
All right.
[APPLAUSE]
Thank you, Mr. Walsh--
Mr. Mayor.
So briefly just a few things that'
struck me about the mayor's comments."
One is when we think about dealing'
with housing issues, when we think'
about it from the federal level, it's often siloed."
I think hearing from the mayor tonight at the local level,'
he's talking about not just housing talk,"
he's talking about transportation,"
he's talking about urban planning,"
he's talking about workforce development."
Having all those things linked is so important.'
I think the way the mayor talked about that holistically'
is incredibly important.
Secondly, his comments as he began, he talked about the need'
for dialogue.
And I think these issues are thorny,'
and we're talking about balancing the issues of housing"
is balancing the issues of the community'
and the issues of the broader city and the broader region.'
It's about balancing the issues of the tenants,"
about the issues of the developers.'
All these perspectives have value.'
They have to be balanced, and it's not easy."
And what it also takes is good ideas.'
And the other thing the mayor said that I want to echo again'
is the fact that we need good, bright people working'
on these issues.
And I hope-- one reason we had the mayor here tonight'
was to inspire people at the Harvard'
at the Graduate schools, the undergraduates schools,'
at Rindge and Latin to go into housing,'
to work on these issues.
And so I hope that--
Mr. Mayor, I appreciate you being'
with us here tonight, sharing your perspective,'
sharing your passion.
And I hope that you've helped inspire a new generation"
of housing leaders.
So thank you, Mr. Mayor.
Thank you for being here.
[APPLAUSE]
