Well, good evening, everyone.
Thank you for joining us.
There's many of you that have come from outside,"
we are very grateful.
I'm Anita Berrizbeitia, Chair of the Department"
of Landscape Architecture, for those of you'
that don't know me.
I hope the students will trickle in, their reviews are looming.'
And so, let's see.
And I am very happy to welcome Stig Andersson'
to the last event of the year.
We've had a very wonderful series this year,"
and we are culminating it with one of the great designers'
in Europe.
Stig Andersson is a founding partner'
of SLA Architects, established in 1994 in Copenhagen.'
And now with offices in Aarhus and Oslo.'
And he is a professor at the University of Copenhagen.'
The firm has a very extensive international portfolio'
of built work in all types of contexts and scales of material'
and spatial transformation.
In many ways, the projects are informed'
by the imperatives of today, those of ecological planning,'
energy conservation, water management, remediation,'
conservation.
Yet at the same time, SLA explores and activates'
what they call the necessary complementarity between natural'
and constructed landscapes.
This idea is productive in their work,'
because it enables a complex coexistence of agendas,'
opening the way for formal and material'
expression and a renewed investigation'
into issues of landscape character and visual quality--'
that is aesthetics.
Andersson speaks about the necessity'
of establishing an aesthetic position in design,'
in the face of extreme rationalization'
of its processes and its argumentation.'
This was the theme of his installation'
for the Danish pavilion at the 2014 Venice Biennale titled,'
The Empowerment of Aesthetics.
In his formulation, the creation of a new aesthetic for nature'
is a fundamental part of the ethic'
of working in the Anthropocene.
Rather than remaining on a crisis response that'
is supported by all the necessary regulatory frameworks'
that define and bracket our practice,'
he argues that these need to be paired with essentials,'
the poetic, and the tactile.
A quote from his exhibition reads, "for too long,'
whenever we had to make a case for what our future should'
look like, we have focused on the rational aspect.'
We have not understood that the aesthetic aspect complements'
the rational.
This means that we must find an entirely new language'
to talk about the value of aesthetics,'
a language in which the [inaudible] amenity'
value of a tree, for example, is as important as a tree's"
usefulness, in terms of soaking up rainwater, absorbing'
CO2, and making our house prices soar."'
End of quote.
As you will see tonight, their work'
exudes an optimism that is centered'
on the development of this broadly understood'
aesthetic value of landscapes.
Celebrated through the attention of scale,'
materials, and the specific ways in which we can and need'
to construct the interface between cities and nature,'
buildings and landscape, and people and landscape.'
SLA has received the European Award, The Guardian Award,'
the Royal Institute of British Architects Award,'
the World Landscape Architecture Award, and the CF Hansen'
Medal-- which is the highest national honor given'
to a Danish designer.
Please join me in welcoming Stig Andersson.'
[applause]
Thank you very much.
Thank you for the kind words.
Yeah, good evening, and thank you'
for inviting me to Harvard University, and talk on my view'
and approach to landscape architecture.'
And I will show some of our projects from their office.'
But I start 30,000 years ago, when'
the ice began to retreat after the last ice age.'
A huge pressure on the Earth's crust was relieved"
and a new life began to grow.
The first people from the Stone Age learned to use fire,'
they picked it up from wildfire and lightning strikes,'
they learned to delimit it, and to keep it alive with wood.'
Later, they learned to create fire themselves.'
Man learned to control and create fire,'
and to put out the fire.
The first step in man's separation from nature"
was taken.
It is not far from creating fire to cultivate the earth,'
and to consume fossil fuel for energy,'
and to replace nature process as the mechanical technology.'
Thousands of years have elapsed and today, we'
see the result of man-made activities.'
Before man came to Iceland--
one of the Scandinavian islands--'
the whole island was covered with forest.'
Man began to use wood for fire, for building,'
and to cultivate land.
Finally, all the forest on the island was replaced'
by an unexpected and unforeseen new and man-made nature--'
what you see on the screen.
This demands a new understanding and description'
of what the relationship between man and the new nature is.'
Sorry, something is missing.
OK.
Activities like this have fundamentally'
changed the global environment, that geological processes'
and the ecosystems.
It has brought us into a new global state, what'
we call the Anthropocene era.
The Anthropocene is a term widely used to name the fact'
that many ecosystems and geologically significant'
conditions and processes-- like biodiversity and climate--'
have been profoundly outset by human activities.'
This is the first time we live in a global state'
where the nature that was here before us'
has irreversibly changed into a new nature that has the form'
and expression, as a result of our way of consuming'
natural resources.
In other words, we have interfered'
in nature's processes so vital that they are no longer"
the nature we knew.
We are co-creator of the new and the Anthropocene nature.'
It means we are now responsible for our own destiny'
and common future.
With this recognition, the distinction'
between nature and culture as two separated concepts'
can no longer be preserved.
The two are woven into each other.'
This demands a new understanding and description'
of what the relationship between man and the new nature is.'
This image you see here is from Ussuri Bay in Vladivostok,'
in Russia.
It's a dumping pit for waste glass disposal."
You'd have changed the local nature"
to a new, where the eroded glass pieces are'
mixed with eroded and billions of years old stones'
and form a new nature.
This image you see here are from a project we call a new nature.'
It's in Fredericia, in Denmark, a small town village not far"
from Copenhagen. A former industrial plant'
in the harbor of the city for production of chemicals--'
organic chemicals.
The underground is still very contaminated.'
All buildings were removed, and left over was an open field.'
We provided a combination of many and new materials--'
different materials, biotic and mineral,'
artificial and man-made--
that through time interact and create'
and new nature that unfolds, depending'
on the local weather, the soil, the salty wind,'
and other local conditions.
I show you here a series of images'
from the construction time, carried out'
because of our design.
The construction workers was following the drawings.'
It might look a little bit sloppy, it is on purpose.'
The goal was not architectural control or order,'
but to show the unfinished-- that which'
is changing constantly in the progression when the elements'
react with each other.
We were interested in how we can create a new view'
on the concept of nature.
Show it again, I think.
We were interested in how we can create a new view'
on the concept of nature, recognizing that we are'
co-creator of the new nature.
We would also investigate what it'
meant for the perception of a landscape architecture.'
It is our knowledge and understanding'
of how the universe came into being which underlies'
the design methodology, and the way'
we started the process of developing a new nature,'
based on the interaction between the elements.'
I can explain a little bit more on that.'
In the few nanoseconds just after Big Bang 14 and 1/2'
billion years ago, the two most simple elements--'
helium and hydrogen--
were created.
Due to their electrical charges, they cannot react with each'
other.
14 and 1/2 billion years later, we'
sit here in the auditorium at Harvard,'
and take the note that they actually'
could react with each other.
And one of the outcome of this is a speaker.'
But it is also everything else we see and sense around us.'
I find that quite fascinating.
Scientists have a few years ago, in the Northeast of China,'
found an extremely well preserved fossil of a cricket.'
It was possible to reconstruct a digital wing etch,'
and a digital edition of the pin surface'
the cricket had used as a string,'
like we play on a violin.
I play it for you.
[cricket chirping]
And they were able to reconstruct the cricket love'
song.
So you are listening to the love song from the cricket'
165 million years later than it was last time sung or played.'
So the outcome of Big Bang, 14 and 1/2 billion years later,'
is this speaker, and you can hear'
the sound of the male cricket calling for the female.'
It is a result of very simple formula,'
and the property of this starting point conditions--'
helium and hydrogen, the two most simple elements--'
and the unexpected reaction between their atoms, electrons,'
power fields, and dust to form a sound that we today can recall'
and listen to live.
So this methodology is what we use when we do design.'
This is what we did in Fredericia project.'
So that's why it looks very sloppy,"
when you saw the photographs from the construction site,'
because we wanted everyone to be aware of looking'
at this in a new way.
So it's a new nature, we cannot use the same language or way"
of think things should look like.'
It is unpredictable what happens over a long time, when'
the elements that everything is made from react with each other'
and create something new.
We've got woods, forest, trees, and bark--"
like in this back room from the exhibition'
we had in The Empowerment of Aesthetics in Venice'
Biennale four years ago.
An intimate room, like an interior of a building of bark'
that used to be on the outside of the tree.'
So you walk inside the bark universe, so to say.'
You can't touch it, you can feel it, you can smell it,"
and you can--
often people in there begin talking together.'
Talk about nature, and what this bark surface, the smell,'
to them.
What it do to you?
It's amazing that the foundation of this"
is helium and hydrogen, and a huge waste space,'
and a lot of time just waiting.
So what is under control is all the starting conditions,'
but not the outcome.
The Anthropocene era, 14 and 1/2 billion years later,'
called for a new view and vision of nature'
in the built environment.
The vision that can describe what the new nature is,'
how we understand it, and how we learn from it'
when we practice landscape architecture.'
At the exhibition empowerment of aesthetics,'
I showed how we, in the Nordic region,'
have a unique foundation for formulating a new perspective'
on nature, and using it in the creation of a new landscape'
architecture.
I formulated the view that the built environment, which'
we have the habit of calling architecture, is only one half'
of the concept of architecture.
The other half is the grown environment,'
and relates to the exhibition title, Empowerment'
of Aesthetics.
Where aesthetics is to be understood--'
as the German philosopher Immanuel Kant'
defines it-- as sensuous.
Not how things look like, but how you feel them,'
what they do to you deep inside.
Not to sense, but the feeling you feel when you sense.'
It is not the sense organ that is interesting,'
but the feeling and the power this feeling'
has for you, your own way of understanding'
yourself and your relation to nature's processes,"
and what means to live.
It is a very strong power, and it'
is the one that makes us experience the sublime.'
The sublime is when nature phenomenon embrace you,'
and your unexpected feel of relation to the phenomenon'
deep inside you.
The sublime is something you find in nature,'
it's not something in art that we often are told."
The build on the grown environment,'
I see as complementary to each other, each'
with their own paradigm.
The grown environment is all the matter and natural processes'
that are constant--
mutable, grow, and follow the order of nature.'
It is imperfect, and will never be completed.'
This is exactly what the project in Fredericia was about.'
The built environment is the unchangeable,'
the perfection that will be completed as form and shape.'
It is all that follow the Cartesian thinking.'
And for both of them to apply, we'
need to give up the idea that only one'
paradigm can be the truth.
They oppose, and at the same time, the truth.'
That is that they both presuppose each other,'
and at the same time exclude each other'
in the understanding of what is a complete architecture.'
Thus, the paradigm of the built environment,'
with its language of proportion, scale, hierarchy, geometry,'
and construction, exists at the very same time'
as the paradigm of the grown environment,'
with its language of grow, change, order of nature,'
biodiversity, and photosynthesis.'
The two together are the entire concept of architecture,'
and must therefore be equal present for urban development'
to adapt to the new geological reality.'
So what we face today is that the world have too much'
built environment.
So we have, for thousands of years, practice'
and architecture with only a half solution.'
No wonder we have problems.
This is our proposal for a new headquarter'
for the international pharmaceutical company Novo'
Nordisk, north of Copenhagen. It is'
an example on how we use the complementarity view'
on architecture.
This is how a headquarter usually looks like.'
You have squared up different buildings,'
you have parking area, and a lot of paved area.'
So you come into a site like this,'
you have to find a parking space,'
it could also be raining.
So you are late for the meeting, because there'
was no free parking space, or when'
you found one you had to walk quite a lot'
to get into the building, and it was raining so you are wet.'
This is a very good start on a meeting.'
But this is how we have done for many, many years.'
We proposed to change this usual model of a headquarter'
from a complex of offices building to one free standing'
building, very compact, with all the functions inside,'
and the setting in a grown environment.'
Now, I'll show you a picture that's"
taken from exactly the same position a half year later.'
Today, it is a roof of a parking construction--'
we call it nature park--
and it is on the same level as the surrounding neighborhoods,'
so no one knows that all the parking is underneath.'
Even more cars can be parked there.'
Everyone can come into the construction.'
Everyone can come in to this headquarter'
without getting wet.
Everyone can easily find a parking space.'
And everyone have the grown environment as the attraction.'
We designed the nature park as an overgrown environment,'
complimentary to the built environment,'
so the two together can constitute a complex complete'
architecture.
And not just a half solution, as we usually'
see, where only the building with the functional'
services around it is in focus.
And complete architecture, where the relationship'
between geometrical structure of the building,'
according to the logic and form of the constructed'
architecture, and the ever-changing mutable'
expression of the grown on an equal level.'
We work carefully with more than 1,000 new trees to be planted.'
Many different species, and each tree'
is carefully selected in several of major European nurseries.'
We have people from the office traveling around in Europe'
to find the trees, because we were looking for all the trees'
that they couldn't sell.
All the trees that were crooked had character,'
and most clearly show natural characteristic growth.'
It's not what you can sell from a nursery."
So they have a lot of these trees'
that they don't know what to do with."
We bought them all.
They are now at Novo.
And actually, it's quite interesting,"
because it's changing the nursery--"
especially in Denmark.
So the different nurseries ask us now,'
how should we grow trees?
Because they see that the trend has'
changed from this artificially architecturally tree to tree'
to a more natural growing trees.
So we are now in a process where we are changing'
the business for the nurseries.
All the trees had a name--
Latin name, of course--
have an age, have a region, and it's all categorized."
So these two girls you see here from their staff organizing,'
they know exactly which tree they are placing where.'
So we built up a new ecosystem with the different expertise'
we have from gardeners and others in the office.'
So it's a purely artificial created"
new biological ecosystem.
This is the grown environment man-made.'
Some of the trees were more than 30 years old, some of them'
died on the way up from Germany or Holland--'
wherever-- to Denmark.
Usually they will be replaced by another one,'
but not in this case.
So we place all the dead trees--
all the trees dying--
they are still because it raises the biodiversity'
and the whole system of creating habitat for insects and birds.'
After half year, we have different bees coming here,'
settle down in this new habitat that we haven't seen in Denmark"
for many, many years.
So the Copenhagen University have'
been monitoring to see how this new nature is providing life'
as a habitat.
So it's an ecosystem, as a living self-regulated habitat,"
where the gardeners' maintenance is"
to support the biological development, to increase'
the biodiversity, and provide more and more matter'
that can attract insects, birds, and people.'
It is not to achieve a particular visual or formal'
expression.
The new nature perform both for cleaning the soil, air,'
and water through the many trees collecting rainwater'
from cloudburst, and reuse it in the function'
of the planting inside the building'
to perform to increase biodiversity'
in the industrial surrounding area'
and ensure economical growth, [inaudible],,'
and attract the right stuff.
The living habitat is also the innovation lab'
for the researchers to invent new knowledge and product'
for the company.
Usually they have innovation lab inside the building,'
usually it's spaced with different colors,"
funny furnitures, and stuff like that.'
But now, they found out that it actually'
developed much more interesting discussion being in nature.'
You all know that, when you need to relax,'
when you come up with new ideas, you'
try to find a place where you'll meet the natural phenomena that"
always embrace us.
What was the hardest job in this process of one year, where'
we have to convince the directors of Novo'
that some of the trees have to be right in the path.'
So logically, of course, they ask, why should there'
be a tree right in the path?
Then you have to go around it.
That's the point.
It took one year to convince them why.'
So it is an auto innovation lab, and it's"
the place where the employees meet, exchange knowledge,'
and solve problems, and meet with their clients,'
and collaborators.
So you see here the two guys coming up, discussing.'
Now there is a tree.
They struggle to get around it.
But when you find this tree in the way,'
he was forced to go around it.
And it is in the same second you are distracted'
when something new can happen in your thinking,'
and in the conversation.
This is innovation.
This from the very beginning.
This is also why there are so many paths and crossings points'
at this site.
It's about having most people meeting each other most times."
So no parallel structure, always crossing.'
The new nature is the empowerment of a new thinking.'
The new nature perform well on the four key nodes,'
which is important for Novo's economic growth,"
environmental protection, social equality,'
and cultural diversity.
This is the first time that Novo used nature'
as part of the branding.
A landscape architecture that works'
on its own paradigm and not just have'
the purpose of showing beautiful proportions of the build.'
This opens for another understanding'
of what landscape architecture is,'
and how it can give us more value than the way'
we have been looking at it for the last 200 years.'
The concept of landscape architecture'
come from art history.
It appears for the first time less than 200 years ago,'
in the book on the landscape architecture'
of great painters in Italy.
The book is an art theoretical review'
on how a building, by its location'
in an untouched nature, can show the potential'
of the grown environment to highlight the beauty'
proportions of the builds.
So here, on the screen, you see illustrations from the book.'
In this conventional scene, landscape architecture'
have the function of servicing the built environment.'
It means to emphasize the quality of the built'
environment and nothing else.
But the new nature and the new climate'
we are living within today no longer'
show the beauty of the built or the built environments.'
It rather shows how fragile our cities are build,'
and how weak the cities are infrastructurally organized.'
Our conventional view on the purpose of landscape'
architecture is challenged.
Challenged since it rather show the weakness'
of the builds than shows the beauty of it.'
When few people see the beauty in the new wind and rain--'
and most people fear the wind and rain--'
we need to reconsider the concept of beauty,'
and what is nature in the European context.'
As I see it and practice a new approach to landscape'
architecture, is that--
which can bring a new order into our built environment,'
so it becomes much more livable and adjust'
to the new climate geology and the era that we are part of.'
On the screen here is the ongoing development'
of a housing quarter in Copenhagen called [inaudible]..'
The local inhabitants, and the local landowner association'
asked us, after 10 years looking at this,'
to bring living and growing matter to the built environment'
in order to raise the level of experienced life quality.'
As complimentary to the focus on form--'
the build-- the grown is focused on matter.'
The function of the grown is not to emphasize qualities in the'
build, but to provide residents with the opportunity'
for natural experiences in the habitat with insects, birds,'
and plant, and social relations between the local residents.'
Which is also what happened here.'
So now we are changing all these lawns'
in the whole quarter with this kind of planting.'
And we are guiding the people there,'
so we are not doing the design all the time,'
we are explaining them how to do it.'
Where to buy seeds, where to buy trees--'
so they get involved in the project himself.'
Because what we are after here is not so much how it looks,'
but how it feels.
How does it embrace the people?
How does it qualify the social relations between people?'
Another issue is that in this sort of areas'
there are still a lot of square meters where you can do that.'
But in other places, there's no more"
square meters left to provide the grown environment'
to improve the quality of the city.'
Far most areas in the cities are urban densified,'
have a character like this.
There is no space for the grown environment.'
The more that is built, the more absent becomes the growth.'
Which is interesting, because this is what people ask for.'
This is what we all ask for.
Therefore, the built environment have'
to perform the missing nature, and the missing opportunities'
should be embraced by the phenomenon'
of natural processes.
And to do so we have to change the urban environment.'
An example on this is the parking construction'
as a foundation for a new and man-made nature'
in the dense urban context of Copenhagen.'
The roof of this construction of a two story parking building'
is folded from the street level and set'
in meters up to a promenade.
Under the promenade are the different features'
to services in the neighborhood.
These all rest on the very contaminated underground, which'
[inaudible] avoided to remove.
We named the project [inaudible]..'
It is in the heart of Copenhagen that, for a long time,'
have been considered as left over.'
A dune is a pile of sand raising itself'
several meter over the surrounding land.'
It has a steep slope on 20-30 degrees,'
and you have in the [inaudible] side,'
and a weaker slope on the wind side.'
A dune consist of sand--
billions of tiny little grain of sand--'
they are all alike, almost the same size, form, and color.'
It is this granite eroded from old mountains'
and rounded by the wind, and constantly'
moving on top of each other, never resting.'
It's like cement.
They are connected and shape different forms,'
depending on the direction of the wind, the temperature,'
and the local air, and the [inaudible] of the grains.'
We are seeing the shape of the dune being'
created while it happens.
The migration sand dune is constantly'
shaped by the wind and the micro-climate.'
Study of dunes are without scale.'
The scale is defined in the second'
when your studies are transformed'
into a physical site.
This is what we did here with our design.'
In a similar way as with the dune,'
the small grains in concrete are connected'
to shape the city dune.
It folds in one large and current movement.'
Like the pattern of clouds, the form of the surface'
have no reputation.
It's all-over unique.
It is [inaudible] and bright white concrete surface'
of 7,500 square meters, with a series'
of many and different smaller spaces, hollows, and curves,'
all at the time unbroken, just as'
a dune you meet while walking in the dune'
landscape at the coast.
The matter remains the same, and constitute a wholeness just'
like water and air.
Sand can also not be separated.
By making the surface of the concrete'
as large as possible and bright white,'
we can also raise the albedo effect to a maximum.'
It means, we can keep the incoming sunlight at the site'
and return the incoming heat radiation back to the air.'
The result is a cooler micro-climate'
during the warm periods of the year,'
and keeping the brightness of the light within the space.'
And this is two phenomena that you'
can feel very strongly without being much aware about it.'
Just passing this area on the pedestrian line'
makes you aware that something else is happening here.'
When you both feel the small breeze,'
but also when you feel or sense the light on this site.'
We collect all the rainwater falling'
on the sides, fall to the plants,'
and to irrigate the whole system.'
It cools the air and give the site a moisturizing atmosphere.'
It creates a small breeze that you'
can feel when you're passing.
It is a composition of spaces that'
slide in and out of each other, and can be experienced'
through your movement.
The atmosphere you sense is here favoring the sensuous ability'
in both the near and the far environment.'
You see the surrounding scenery of the city'
in a completely new perspective that you else'
have seen in the city.
The verity of space appeal to your so-called flowing'
intelligence.
It means appeal to you ability to navigate'
through a stream of information, instead'
of crystallized intelligence of memorizing knowledge already'
known, like elsewhere you move in the city.'
So it challenge you while you're moving here."
The flowing intelligence is activated'
through the shift in terrain, the plantation,'
the local weather, and other people moving around.'
When you walk around on this [? rain, ?]'
you experience only parts of it--'
fragments of a whole, a whole that is never to be grasped,'
unlike the way you grasp a building or most other sites'
in the city.
All these small and different impressions-- a lot'
of fragments put together-- form a subjective image.'
An image that is a result of concrete observation and sensed'
sensation while you are moving around.'
So that gives you a relationship to this specific site.'
And this is exactly the same way you do when you are in nature,'
when you were in the forest, when you're on the beach."
So the way you experience it, the way you perceive yourself'
these position, is exactly the same we are after creating,'
but in an open condition.
To visit will never be the same.
Next time you are here, you will find another route'
and the space will appear differently'
as it changed both with the weather, the light, the time,'
the grow, and your own state of mind.'
We discover in this a new order, which'
is a result of all the little bits and pieces'
we see and sense.
And we try to get an overview, a subjective view of the space'
that will replace the overview.
It constitutes a new and personable image'
of the space and its objects that'
is much more and larger than what'
a single photo or plain drawing can uncover.'
So it's not a design here-- is not"
an arrangement that minds nature.'
It is a new manner of seeing and experiencing'
nature in the city, both as an organization system'
and the system of change.
The ambition is to create a view of the new nature that'
is different from the view we have'
on the nature that was here-- that belongs to the past.'
A view that the new nature is something we design and clarify'
what the grown environment can do to you in the urban context.'
There's three years between the two photo here."
So what you experienced the first time'
is very different from what you experienced through the years.'
The building on the side is still the same.'
So that defines very clearly what'
is the difference between the built environment'
and the grown environment.
The title of today's top, after nature,"
refer to the man-made abstraction'
of the natural order.
The new nature, the grown environment, and in this case'
the city dune is a man-made composition'
based on inside in nature, and how'
nature processes and phenomenon awake feelings in you,'
embrace you, and through a man-made abstraction'
of elements have removed as much as'
possible related to the image, so'
that only the essence remains.
You can say that the image of nature, as we know it,'
is taken out of the object--
the dune-- and left is the matter and the way'
you sense it.
At the exhibition empowerment of aesthetics,'
I had placed sand from the island called'
[inaudible] as a specific coast area of [inaudible] called'
[inaudible].
And I placed sand from there on the Italian sandstone'
inside the Danish pavilion.
The sand from [inaudible] has a particular sound'
when you step on it, it is crushing both hard and feels'
soft, and acts in a dry state as if it was moisty.'
You know it from the beach, from the sand dune and the coast,'
and I wanted to bring this specific feeling,'
the sense of beach and water, of sand, into the pavilion space.'
And through this specific contact'
with the matter, the pure element of sand--'
this [? elysium-- ?] the visitor's aesthetic sense"
for nature through an abstraction.'
That dune is not here, but with the sound and the feeling,'
stepping onto the matter--
the sound-- the dune, the beach or even the'
sound of the waves from the sea comes into your mind'
from your memory, but all in fragments.'
This is just what happened to the little boy'
who one day visit the pavilion with his mother.'
When he stepped on the sand [inaudible] floor,'
he looked around and I ask her, where's the water?"
I call this the aesthetic sense of nature.'
It is the presence of physic matter, living and mineral,'
together with the local weather--'
light, humidity, and wind--
create an atmosphere of something indefinable'
that embrace you as you sense before thinking.'
That is what I strive for in my design.'
The grown environment delivers both rational ecosystem'
services, like trees, that cleans the air'
for particular pollution.
And they convert carbon dioxide into oxygen by photosynthesis'
and using rainwater to do so to grow.'
And we can all breathe--
breathe and share the same air that there's"
all over the world.
The grown environment is both the ecosystem service'
and that which awakens your aesthetic sense of nature.'
We arrange the Danish culture scent in Beijing, in China,'
with pine trees of varieties that today all'
grow in the city.
In the west, we have the habit of seeing'
trees that defies the external forces, such as wind'
and pruning, to get a shape that is just'
show the struggle as beautiful.
In the eastern culture, the free growing pine tree'
not formed by external forces, such as wind or pruning,'
or stressed environment is considered beautiful.'
This is the true fundamental different way views on beauty,'
and I see them both necessary for today's understanding"
the term of beauty.
With the exhibition here, I was interested to show'
the deep and 1,000 year old tradition of appreciating'
the pine tree as a power that can both heal'
stress, and counteract a stressed environment,'
and purify the air for pollution,'
and create an option for our city to act like a forest.'
The pine trees transform a huge amount of rain water'
into produce and photosynthesis, where the air's NOx gases"
convert to harmless gases, and carbon dioxide'
become oxygen. If this can be scaled from that limit'
by one single individual tree, there are'
billions of trees to be used.
This is precisely what we radically changed,'
and this is precisely what radically'
will change the expression of big growing cities,'
and the basis for our quality of life.'
The city will itself perform the missing nature,'
and the shapes of the trees will express what beauty'
means for people in the city.
Every morning, trees were sprayed with water'
so the whole space smelled of the needles'
and felt more cool than outside in the summer heat.'
The trees grew through the entire exhibition period.'
It was obviously-- and you could see it.'
The steady sense of nature make us aware'
the nature's processes are not just and only"
a threat we must fight against, because we'
believe the goal is to survive.
The goal is quite opposite.
It is to live, it's about the act of living."
As the Swedish [? etymologist ?] and author [? frederik ?]'
[? schuber ?] clearly expressed, "you cannot build a community'
based on fear, because no one can be bothered to be afraid'
for so long.
An initiative that draws on nature feeling'
lasts much longer."
This is the Empowerment of Aesthetics.'
Aesthetics, a sensory perception.'
Not how things look, but their ability'
to evoke our intuitive feeling for what nature can do to us.'
And it's a method for design.
Two years ago, we were invited to participate'
in the international competition about Reinventing Paris.'
We were in team with Jacques Ferrier Architects.'
And with BMP Real Estate as a client,'
we developed a business case buying'
the right to build approximately 5,000 square meter in the air'
space about le peripherique.
We proposed a strategy that aims, the more you build,'
the more clean air.
We all do know the convention, the more infrastructure'
you build, and the more build environment'
you provide, the less open space for living and growing matter.'
That is not new.
In this case here, building on top'
of the space of le peripherique, there'
is no space for the grown environment.'
Therefore, the building have to act and perform'
the missing nature, both the ecosystem'
services and their aesthetic sense of nature.'
This is new, a building that performed the missing nature.'
By that, the grown and living matter'
will increase the biodiversity, clean the air,'
reduce stress, increase sustainability,'
and make space for a new recognition of ourself'
as part of a new and man-made nature'
in the very dense, noisy Paris.
By building in the air space above le peripherique--'
32 kilometers-- more and more people'
to gain access to experience processes of nature'
than they do today where nature is absent.'
Le peripherique is also a barrier between the suburbs'
and inner Paris.
So if you use this strategy building'
32 kilometers of this kind of building I'm showing you,"
you will not only have much cleaner air in Paris,'
but you will also have access to nature in the very dense city.'
So our clean air strategy both cleans the highly contaminated'
air for life threaten pm10 and pm2.5 particles,'
while at the same time create a new nature that embrace you,'
fill you with aesthetic sense of phenomena of nature,'
right in the heavy builds, urban,'
traffic-loaded environment.
We have research on which plans the building facade should be'
provided in order to most efficiently increase'
biodiversity and increase the ability of the plant leaves'
to collect pm2.5 particles.
Break down the wind, optimizing the presence of light,'
and making the outdoor space as pleasant'
and comfortable to dwell in as possible.'
The ratio of green in a city are often'
given by the [inaudible] square meter surface.'
In this case, we provide as well the vertical areas'
of facade's square meter.
Means we have a green ratio value here three to four times'
larger than usually.
The built environment will perform the process'
as phenomenon of nature, and create space'
where people can meet, being social,'
and create things together, like urban farming and the growth'
of green tea--
maybe you already know, but green tea does not'
[? outstrip ?] NOx gases.
So you can grow green tea in a very polluted areas,'
and drink it.
It requires a multidisciplinary team of professionals'
to create this.
In my own work at SLA, it means the staff'
of gardeners, plant engineers, horticultural experience,'
forest experts, biologist, journalist, anthropologist,'
philosophers, landscape architect, architects,'
planners, building economists, and so on and so on.'
It is all that knowledge on water, wind, sunlight,'
and all the other factors that forms'
the design expression of the facades of this building.'
Traditional the architects designed the shape'
of the building and the facade.
That was also the case in the projects of Novo'
I showed you, that one building and that was'
the grown environment.
The two paradigm-- the built and the grown-- were separated.'
Here in Paris, we try to merge the two paradigms--'
the build and the grown--
into an interwoven system.
It is a close cooperation between the architects,'
the engineers, and us at the SLA office.'
We are designing together the whole building'
complex and the facades.
The whole complex is it an advanced ecosystem'
where the build environment coexist'
and cooperate with a grown environment'
to provide office spaces and apartments that'
perform in new nature.
We finish the schematics design last year,'
and now we are waiting for construction permit coming'
this spring.
Here, you see Paris wrapped up in smog.'
The build environment is challenged, and has already'
clearly showed that the way we build and have developed'
urbanity so far is no longer meaningful, if we'
want more than just, and partly, to survive.'
If we want more than just survive,'
we are forced to organize ourself'
in societies where the architecture is both the grown'
and the built. And then to work as a system and not as usual'
seems as a simple separated constructions.'
We cannot change the development we have started.'
We can only adapt and adjust on a smaller scale,'
and make local initiatives, as I have showed'
you a number of examples on.
This is no grand or magnificent plan.'
There is no political agreement, either'
on a global, national, or municipality scale.'
As I see it, it is local actions and initiatives'
that involves civil society.
It is an engaged civil action showing responsibility'
and understanding that we are responsible for our own destiny'
and life, that can change the way we used to look'
at nature and life quality.
In this situation, it is the lightness of nature--'
a new nature-- that we are co-creator of,'
and the appreciation of the aesthetic sense'
of nature that is the focal point for social engagement'
and actions.
This is what happened here in this local community,'
[inaudible] showed earlier, where the new residents'
asked us to change the flat lawn to a grown environment.'
And this is also what happened on this project'
you see here on the screen, which is a new nature'
park in Copenhagen where we changed design of an existing'
park into a new, so that all rainwater falling'
into an overbuilt neighborhood in the future'
has led to this specific side, and from here'
partly slowly declined, and partly--'
when it's cloudburst-- also rained off to the nearby lakes."
On the way to the lakes, the water is also cleaned.'
It's called [? hanstowsen's ?] Park,"
and it gives the neighborhood a social boost at the same time,'
by involving all the residents in the neighborhood.'
The project solves both the water management'
issue that the conventional way of building the cities'
does not, solve a number of social problem,'
and is the first kind of this project.'
We start detail design this year.'
There is a momentum for a new approach to landscape'
architecture that equals the build'
and the grown environment to form a new architecture and new'
[inaudible].
We have all the knowledge, the location, the technology,'
and the economy to do so.
We only need the decision makers and the politicians,'
and major influential companies and investment companies'
show willingness and courage to act.'
I can say without Hidalgo, the mayor of Paris,'
eager after to see a project like the one I showed here,'
it wouldn't have one.
We are now, all of us, responsible'
for our common destiny and future,'
and that call for a new vision for landscape architecture.'
Thank you for your time.
OK, thank you so much for the beautiful work.'
We have a few moments for questions from the audience.'
Thank you very much.
It's a very beautiful park, it's just like the sort of place"
I grew up in a long time ago.
But I live in the suburbs of Boston,'
and to create a landscape like this'
is potentially an invitation to ticks'
and increased number of cases of Lyme disease and other tick'
borne diseases.
So it's a little bit frightening,"
depending on the environment you come from.'
How would you deal with that issue of a changing'
ecology, possibly due to global warming, or, you know,'
just other factors?
And the risks that may or may not'
arise when you alter the landscapes that people'
are actually, physically, closely intermingling with?'
Children and others?
Is it clear?
Yeah.
One example is the city dune project.'
It was the first people inhabiting'
the space was the skaters.
And really skaters bringing ticks, as well.'
So they make-- it's a financial bank."
So the leaders of that make an agreement with the skaters,'
that they can use the whole area for skating.'
It was one of north Europe's best skating ramps."
But if you destroy or damage some of the plantation,'
you are out.
So the skaters take care of the place.'
This is one of the places in Copenhagen,'
there's no ticks at all.
There's no-- what is called--
ticks-- when you pain something.
Yeah, there's graffiti.
But is when you tell others that it's your domain?"
Tagging, yeah.
[inaudible]
So it's about how people talk together."
Wait, I'm a little bit confused.
Maybe you understood me or not.
I'm talking about type of-- it's not exactly an insect,"
but let's say an insect--
ticks.
T-I-C-K-S.
OK.
Bite and carry disease.
Now I understand, yeah.
They live in the fields and the meadows.'
I don't know what to say.
I can see it's about people treating this, of course"
there will be insects.
The whole point is to have insects.'
No, this is an issue of insect vectors.'
Like, you know, mosquitoes and malaria?'
Yeah.
Well this is a bad analogy--
I don't think quickly.
But assuming in a tropical country where there's"
malaria you build a very nice park like this with lots'
of water and you increase the mosquito population'
of the particular vector from malaria 500 times.'
What you will then get is an epidemic'
of malaria in the area.
There is a problem, not everywhere in the world--'
I know in some parts of Europe there is a problem.'
But it's not insects, insects are good in general."
But it's a problem of introducing disease vectors--"
vectors are insects which act as mechanisms by which diseases'
are transferred to people from other people,'
or the insects themselves, or other animals in the ecosystem.'
If you increase the vector population'
in a region where this is a problem,'
you may create an increased risk to people, and especially'
children.
So I wonder to what degree this issue is being addressed'
by landscape architects?
Because it's an important one, actually."
We are not really--
not only landscape architects.
We also a lot of other professions.'
So every place we work, we investigate conditions.'
So the project you see here looks different other places'
in the world.
So when we work in the Middle East, or in China,'
we do something else.
Now I just show these projects.
Of course, we are not aiming at making malaria'
a problem in the project.
But it's interesting.
I think it's a very interesting question,"
because more than 100,000 new material had been developed'
within a very short timeline.
When the welfare system was starting,'
no one knew the consequences of that.'
Today we are struggling with them.'
I have a question just to follow up.'
And I think you made very, very good points.'
And I would just like one observation.'
I don't know if you agree on that."
If you have the grown nature or the grown environment,'
there is a kind of melancholy we have often when we see it.'
You know, is something like past and the atmospheres.'
We would love too long for it, but its actually somehow gone.'
And your built environment.
There is a kind of different atmosphere with it,'
working really with this kind of new approach about landscape'
in cities, which is actually more human interaction.'
We can actually relate more to it.'
There is also more fun, its more interesting.'
And its an interesting character.'
And I would just like to say a little bit'
about the question we had before,'
because I have this also in my practice working a lot in Asia.'
There's an extremely fear about this old landscape,"
that all kinds of diseases come up.'
And when you create a kind of new landscape,'
we often mix this up.
But in reality, to create a new landscape in a city'
is quite safe.
We have no diseases, we have not problems,'
and we can also show that is really much more healthy.'
So I like these two points in your observation, in your talk,'
and I would just like how you feel'
about this atmosphere, this difference of the nature we'
somehow lost, the melancholy we have with that,'
and this kind of new approach about the built nature, which'
has a totally different character-- which'
has probably very much future?
I think the real challenge is that they have to accept'
a new way of looking at nature.
We cannot use the notion we have been using before.'
But of course, emotionally we are attracted.'
And we have a difficult language to express what we emotionally'
feel when we feel something.
So what I call the aesthetic sense of nature'
is this inner feeling you have.
And its about, how do we deal with a new nature'
to raise that feeling inside you?'
And I don't think it's the visual,"
because we have other senses.
And it's not about how things look,"
it's about how you feel inside, in your stomach."
And you can react on that on many different levels.'
I see my job, or my work, or this'
is what I'm aiming at, to evoke that feeling."
And what kind of tools do I have?'
This is what I do here.
I'll try to explain about.
But we struggle a long time, for many, many years to--'
now I show primary projects in Copenhagen and Denmark.'
I couldn't do that 10 years ago.
They were laughing at me.
Two years ago, we had a corporation--'
the municipality of Copenhagen. They wanted urban nature.'
So I said, no, no.
Not urban nature.
Urban and nature is two different things,'
so there's nothing called urban nature."
That's something new that never existed before."
And that's interesting.
This is when nature become visible, or become'
present in an urban context.
It's not the trees that is cut, it's"
not the small flowers show the tarmac and all that.'
This is all done in the built environment thinking.'
When we talk about nature in the city,'
it's about nature and how nature order works."
So we had all our projects in the beginning.'
We have to take out the curve trees,'
it should all be vertical, and be no branches,'
because everyone could walk into them.'
And I said, this is the point.
This is when you walk in the forest, you always get hurt.'
So the thinking of the presence of what nature do to you,'
it become much more a weirdness about it.'
So now the next step is, how does it look then?'
We have in Copenhagen-- this is from the faculty we just'
finished for the health--
university of health.
And it was really difficult to discuss with them'
to have real nature outside.
I mean, they all have their analyzes, reports, PhD'
students, a lot of things that improve evidence'
that the more green you have the more healthy you become.'
It still is difficult. And it's because you have people--"
most of us have still an impression'
of how it should look like.
But the conditions for that is not existing anymore.'
This is also why I think it's interesting to show"
the damage the new climate does, because we only'
see it as a threat.
But it's a fact, it's here.
So we have to find out, what can we learn from that'
in order to make a new design that'
can make us understand that we are part'
of that, which is a threat?
It's because of the way we organize us."
It's because of the way we build."
We have to find a new way to do it, otherwise we just continue.'
I never understood why an area that'
had been destroyed of some climatic catastrophe'
is rebuilt to the same level as before.'
I see it's complete stupid.
It's going to happen again.
And I think this is maybe what we are seeing'
in some of these projects.
That there is a mental change, that now we'
try to do it different.
And then we see the consequences.'
And of course, understand that if there's too much water"
and we doesn't control it in the right way,"
it can become diseases.
It can also come diseases in the trees, and everything else.'
But the whole society is full of diseases.'
We have to be more aware about what we do this time,'
than we have been previous time.
I don't know if--
I tried to follow that.
Thanks for the lecture.
I have a-- I guess a somewhat straightforward question.'
But I wonder--
Could you raise your arm?
I don't know where you are sitting."
Over here.
Sorry.
I was wondering, how do you determine what is grown'
and what is built?
And is there actually a difference'
in how this distinction might be useful in this time'
of new nature or the Anthropocene?'
The grown environment follow the order of nature.'
And the built environment follow the order of construction,'
geometry, and hierarchy--
something is thought.
Something artificial thought, Cartesian thinking.'
And nature is a system, where everything is--'
it acts with each other.
And if you use your built environment--'
traditional and architectural thinking--'
on nature, then it becomes the built environment.'
This is what we have seen for many years.'
This is the way we put trees in rows.'
This is how we make them all the same.'
This is how we cut them.
So I'm talking about that they follow the order of nature,"
they grow.
So you mentioned that nature is a system,'
and it follows a kind of--
Yeah, you can say architecture is more like a structure.'
But I guess-- do you think landscape architects are'
capable of systemic thinking?
I don't know, I'm just explaining what I'm doing."
I have a quick question.
So as you're practicing--
you are practicing globally.
So how do you deal with those places'
where you don't have experiences?"
Say it again, please.
I missed it.
How do you deal with those places, new projects,'
where you don't have experiences basically in new nature?"
I guess, like you said, experiences matters.'
So when you get into a place, you'
want to have something inside to have this kind of moment'
that you want to bring to a people.'
But when you have a project in totally different environments'
than a Scandinavian country, how do'
you get the experience to your design that you want to show?'
I guess you're also asking the different cultures?"
This is one of the reasons--
I guess it's not about a culture."
It's more about the philosophy--
like, you talk about how people are thinking'
about trees, or like those kind of fundamentally different'
understanding of the nature.
Yeah.
Yeah, I guess.
So I guess in your Denmark project,'
do you think you started your design'
thinking from the experiences.
But in other places, you may try to get into the design solution'
through forms.
I still think it's also a cultural issue."
And being able to understand the different'
cultures a way of looking at nature.'
You have to go into that, and this'
is one of the reasons we work very closely'
together with anthropologists.
I like the way you started the lecture from the very beginning'
of the--
some fundamental fact of the universe.'
And that's where we can find common ground then to talk."
I thought the lecture was terrific.'
Thank you so much.
But I wonder--
I worry a little bit that your vocabulary isn't discriminating"
enough, old versus new nature, to help us identify or think'
about how to deal with different situations.'
And here's an example.
I belong to--
I live in Somerville, Massachusetts, a neighboring'
city.
And I belong to a community group that successfully'
sued IKEA, at great expense and with great anxiety,'
over IKEA's wish to build a new store on the mystic waterfront,"
thereby subtracting a significant amount'
of the very little public open space that we have in the town.'
And IKEA's argument was that it could build up"
a perfectly respectable public park on top of its parking'
garage.
And we did some research and came back and said, no,'
you can't.
And it was a difficult case.
We nearly lost.
And, you know, I could imagine the IKEA team coming back'
now, having heard your lectures and saying, new nature, look!'
We're living in a new world, forget about your concerns"
about public open space on the river.'
This is going to create great economic growth'
for Massachusetts.
Look at all the sales tax revenue.'
And we lose our case.
So have you ever confronted situations like that?'
I mean, how do you help people think about the trade-offs'
involved in building green on concrete, versus--'
or in and around concrete-- versus trying'
to preserve pristine public spaces for other kinds of uses?'
IKEA also wanted to build a warehouse right'
in the center of Copenhagen. They have developed smaller'
warehouses, so you can shop there without driving in'
with your big car.
And it was parallel to the harbor of Copenhagen,'
and we have done the overall plan for this long promenade'
with office buildings.
The city dune is the first space in that row.'
And there was no space for building in there,'
on this site IKEA wanted to build.'
And I had meetings with them, and explain them'
that we could actually do similar projects'
that I showed you here today together where'
they are building.
And as you probably know, that they have a concept for how'
they do buildings that cannot be changed, wherever they build.'
But this was on the roof, so of course that was a possibility.'
So they asked someone else to do it.'
Now there's no roof garden.
But they get permission.
So it's all over again.
We tried another one, and so and so on.'
But I think-- as I finished also my talk, this civil society'
action, I think, is very important.'
Because this is what I can see today.'
That's we all civilian go together and interfere"
in the process of all the politicians, the more'
influence we can get to have actually that society we'
ask for.
I see it recently, in two different cases'
in Copenhagen. Where the last part of an area--'
open land-- five meters from the city center,'
which is enormous space that haven't been built."
And they both decided 10 years ago,'
in this specific spot-- very, very little.'
Very small.
Maybe 1/5 of the whole area.
There was people discovering this basic kind of flowers.'
And it raise an opinion against building on that site,'
even though it was decided 10 years ago to build there,'
and it changed the politicians decision.'
Now they're going to find another way, another place"
to build.
It wouldn't have happened 10 years ago."
It happens today.
And I think this is where it's enormous power in having"
the foundation formulate for creating'
this kind of livable places--
grown environmental, as I call it--'
within the cities.
So please, do it again.
Well I think Sig just answered my question about--'
well first of all, thank you.
I'm here.
Yeah, I see you.
Well, thank you so much for--
it's a very timely presentation, because of the way that I"
understood it, it is actually very productive provocation'
in questioning things that we take for granted.'
And as you do that, and you are brave enough'
to claim for that--
for this looking for the uncanny, for the unquestioned--'
I also think that you may face also'
step backs from the regulatory standpoint from city officials'
that--
because they're going through their regulations,"
they have to do things as the status quos,'
just focusing and building the way'
that they have been building.
So did you ever encounter these moments'
where you have to educate or to further discuss projects'
in order to produce your own visions,'
to go against the status quos?
What is your technique in shaping that?'
I think we managed to have a team where everyone is standing'
up for that, and never give up.
This project have really been difficult to realize,'
and it was two people in the office working day and night'
on site to explain to people how to plant.'
So you could say almost idealistic.'
Which is a difficult position to have when you run a business.'
But yeah.
There's no really technique.
Well the technique is to adjust to it,'
and have a very precise goal.
What are you going for?
And we have a strong relationship inside the team,'
so you know everything you do is the right direction,'
and then skip the other things--
priorities.
But I can also show projects that doesn't work very well."
Hi, over here.
[inaudible] I'm curious to hear how"
other communities outside of Denmark'
have received your proposals, other than Danes and Parisians,'
who are very receptive to the new nature of [? stanport. ?]'
I'm wondering whether you have any visions"
for executing these kinds of projects outside.'
I know you mentioned the Middle East,'
and you had an exhibition in Beijing,'
but what about rather than just an installation'
actually incorporating it into the permanent structures'
in these other countries?
We have a lot of projects in Norway.'
And the first ones are now under construction.'
The one in Paris is interesting because Hidalgo,'
the mayor of Paris, in her speech, when'
we won the competition, she was not talking so much'
about landscape architecture.
She was talking about what does this kind of project'
mean, in the sense of social relationship between people?'
We have three projects in China, two of them is small parks,'
and been received--
worked together with Chinese, works very well.'
The other projects, different places we're working now is"
in the beginning phase, so I cannot answer you directly.'
But I can see that the way we think, the way we approach'
works very well together with the local culture'
and communities.
Did they seek you out?
Sorry?
Do they seek you out, or you seek them out?'
Yeah, when it's competition, of course,"
then we have to compete on it.
I would say that as more and more people'
from outside coming to us and asking'
if we can do similar things together with them.'
For different cultures, different nations.'
We have time for one more question.'
Hi.
I had a question about when you differentiate'
between built form and the grown environment,'
and that the grown environment involves processes'
that require landscape architecture to take'
on a different model of representation.'
Because we are talking about temporal changes.'
And in your work, as you get into building diversity'
and building complexity and form,'
we are still tied to the conventions and the softwares'
that the built environment has developed.'
So when you do develop your planting plans,'
given the concept of you trying to cultivate this wilderness,'
how specific do you get in terms of your planting plan?'
And how do you start working with contractors on site who'
are not used to the way in which you--'
in the way the industry wills?
On this project here, for instance.'
To maintain this project--
this is [inaudible] Park.
This was a park before.
Now we are changing it so it becomes'
what they call a climate park.
Because we have to handle all the water in this area.'
In order to maintain this, all the employees'
in the municipality of the maintenance department'
have to be re-schooled, otherwise they can't do it."
So it happens step by step.
I cannot just stand up and say you have to all learn'
a different way.
It takes some time, and they have to do some failure,'
and then they find out how to do it.'
That means that we have to be in the project for a longer time'
than you usually will be.
So we have this EU system that all services are caught up'
in pieces, and you have to compete on each one.'
So it makes it very difficult to develop something which'
is not already determined.
So there will be a part-- when this project is coming'
to being finished in construction,'
it becomes visible for everyone.
Its more and more needed that the people who'
is going to maintain it have to be learning'
a different way of what is beauty,'
and what is the aim of what we are doing here.'
Because they are not going to cut the trees,'
or to take off branches and things like that.'
They have to develop the expressions of matter,'
not the expression of form.
That's completely different from--"
it takes time.
OK, thank you, Stig.
