Good evening and welcome.
My name is Mohsen Mostafavi.
I'm the Dean of the Graduate School of Design,"
and, really, my role here tonight'
is just to welcome you, and say how glad we are,'
how delighted we are that you are all here.'
I know there are so many wonderful individuals, so'
many dignitaries.
We are, of course, very delighted'
that Mayor Mancera is going to be giving the keynote speech'
tonight, and, of course, I'm so delighted and so happy"
that you're here.
I'm also very grateful to Professor Diane Davis,"
the chair of the Department of Urban Planning and Design'
and who has asked me to say a few words--'
and to my friend and colleague Professor'
George Dominguez, who will, of course,'
be introducing the mayor.
But thank you all for being here and for giving me'
this opportunity.
Because there will be a number of introductions'
I will be very, very brief beyond just saying welcome,'
and it's wonderful that you're here."
Just to say a couple of things, one,'
is that we really, really, really love Mexico,'
and that's very important for you to know."
And we are absolutely dedicated to working together'
with you, to have students from Mexico,'
to do projects in Mexico.
And this is what we do, so this is not a promise.'
It's something that we do, and we"
would like to continue this project in an even more'
energetic fashion in the years to come.'
And, of course, it's also fantastic"
that we have the friendship, the connections with the David'
Rockefeller Center, with all the great people who'
work in the center who really make it possible for us'
to do projects in Mexico.
And so, we're really grateful to our colleagues there."
We are also very much to place, at this university,'
and there are many other places, but it's very much"
the place that's really focused on questions of urbanization,"
on the future of cities, on the role of planning'
in terms of the improvement of the cities.'
And, of course, the topic of this conference'
that you will be holding here-- starting tonight'
with the mayors keynote and with the conversations tomorrow--'
is at the heart of the thinking, and the research,'
and the investigation, and the dedication of our students'
to this question of urbanization broadly.'
There is a dilemma.
We urbanize, we improve things, we grow.'
But the very concept of growth itself'
produces the necessity for the utilization of more resources,'
and this is something that, as designers, but also'
for the mayor as someone who's really"
dealing with the leadership of a city,'
you have to really deal with this conundrum'
of the entire relationship between the project'
of urbanization and the project of resource utilization.'
More and more we are also in the context of a society,'
and we, in the United States, are very much'
facing this situation right now, politically,'
where there seems to be an increasing'
desire for a kind of forced amnesia'
towards the consequences of climate change.'
And it's great that tonight, with the mayor's talk,"
we are actually addressing this topic head on,'
and understanding what are the ways in which cities'
and the political leadership of various cities really address'
not only the question of creating better'
environments for their citizens but how'
do they do that in the light of the challenges'
that we face, for example, through this question'
of climate change.
So I think this is the right location.'
This is the right place to be hosting this event with you,'
and we're really grateful that you have agreed"
to do this before with us.
And the last thing I want to say is'
that we do not want, as an institution,'
to be only an academic institution that'
is focusing on inward looking and keeping their knowledge'
and information to ourselves.
We are very interested in the interaction between the Academy'
and real life.
And, in that sense, working with the mayor,'
working with Mexico City as part of a commitment'
that we've made--
also to work with the leadership of a number of cities'
where we feel that the inter-relationship'
between the work of the school and the real work that happens'
in these cities is very important as part'
of a reciprocal relationship between the Academy'
and real world in a way.
So we're really delighted to have this opportunity"
to host the conference here, and I would now'
like to ask Professor Diane Davis to come and make'
the second introduction before George Dominguez introduces'
the mayor.
Thank you.
I was mentioning to the dean that this series'
of introductions is a very Mexican style event because we'
go from the hierarchies and there are so many introductions'
before we get to the main speaker tonight.'
You already know who I am.
I'm Diane Davis.
I also happen to be the chair of the faculty committee on Mexico'
and Central America DRCLAS.
I'm really excited to be in that post because many of you"
know that I have studied Mexico and Mexico City practically'
my entire academic life.
So when I was asked to be involved more in DRCLAS,'
I said, gladly, and they also stepped up to the plate'
to help support this event.
So I really want to thank--
well, Brian is not here-- the director of DRCLAS--'
and Ned, and Rachel, and all the staff over there for help'
making this possible.
I also have to add one more thing to my otherwise prepared'
remarks is I am just so excited and thrilled'
to see Cuauhtemoc Cardenas here, the very first democratically--'
elected mayor of Mexico City after Mexico City'
started moving towards democratization'
and having mayors appointed by the president for decades.'
That democratization of the city was a very important step'
in the national political history.'
And Cuauhtemoc, you're so important to many people,"
both in Mexico and abroad.
I'm really happy that you're here."
I'm not going to talk too long, but I"
do want to say a little something about--'
not to repeat what Mohsen said-- but the kinds of questions,'
the issues that the mayor is addressing in Mexico City are'
the things that we are struggling with here'
at the GSD--
thinking about urban ecological and territorial challenges'
facing the cities and the peoples of the globe.'
But, in particular, Latin America,'
we're a very global institution here at the GSD."
We work in our own backyard, but we also'
work all around the world.
And we have great involvement in Latin America'
because we have collegial relationships'
with faculty in Latin America.
Mexico, in particular, the UNAM is'
one of the major architectural institutions in all'
of Latin America, and we have lots of good relationships'
with former students--
just met one when I was in Mexico'
the last week that just got tenure'
in the architecture department.
And we hope to continue to work more'
with the institutions, academic, as well as public sector'
institutions, and, otherwise, in the days,'
and the months, and the years ahead.'
Among the concerns that motivate our students and faculty'
are those relating to growth, and urbanization,'
and environmental precarity, as the dean has already'
underscored.
I think that we have to remember that these'
are questions that are on everybody's mind these days."
Problems like climate change are--'
on one hand, we think about climate change'
as a global problem, but they're not always easily or adequately"
addressed by national governments'
as we've seen here in the last couple of days with the Trump"
administration.
The dilemma of national governments not always'
stepping it up to the plate to solve'
urban problems and environmental problems'
means that other political leaders'
acting at different sovereignty scales'
must step into the breach.
And this is where city mayors are'
becoming critically important.
In fact, today, I don't know if you"
saw, that there was a long op-ed in the New York Times'
by former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg,'
on precisely this issue, reminding us that cities have'
an important role to play in moving the policy'
agenda on climate change and other key issues.'
Our speaker tonight, Mayor Mancera,'
is one of those extraordinary mayors.'
He has cemented his reputation as a global leader working'
with other mayors around the world, including Paris's Mayor"
Anne Hidalgo, and ex Mayor Michael'
Bloomberg, and other mayors, in raising consciousness'
in spearheading action to address'
environmental and other key challenges of our times'
both in those global conversation circles but'
as well as in Mexico City.
I might also add that Mayor Mancera has also'
enabled an historic change in governance in Mexico City,'
standing at the helm of the recent introduction'
of a new constitution.
And we're going to hear more about that in the conference"
tomorrow, so I hope everybody here'
is going to be at the full day event tomorrow.'
And I would say that these types of governance changes, which'
empower cities vis-a-vis national authorities will'
continue to be necessary if mayors'
are going to be able to accomplish their visionary'
aims.
And, like I said, we can discuss that, as well as'
some of the other environmental and infrastructure problems'
that the mayor is facing, that residents of Mexico City'
are facing, during the day tomorrow--'
with many of the people in the audience will be speakers.'
I also should add, for those of you'
who don't know the Mexican intellectual and political"
context, we have an amazing array'
of people that are kind of the top tier of the thinkers'
about questions of the city, politics, governance,'
and society, and it's going to be"
a really wonderful conference.
I hope you will all be here--
not here, it's in another building at 10:00 AM tomorrow,"
and it's in the program.
So I'm not going to go into an extended introduction of Mayor"
Mancera's career and background because I'm"
going to turn that over to Professor Jorge Dominguez, who'
will be making the introduction to the mayor.'
So let me just say a little something about Jorge.'
Well, I may have made my career by studying the urban politics'
of Mexico City.
Jorge Dominguez has established his global reputation'
for deep and expansive research on Mexico'
as well as many other countries of Latin America.'
He's the Antonio Madero professor"
for the study of Mexico, works in the Department'
of Government, and has produced work'
that is impacting Mexico and generations'
of students who work on that country and elsewhere.'
I mean, he has a whole tier of students'
that have continued to push forward studies of Mexico.'
Jorge has played a key role at Harvard'
in almost all international initiatives, whether at DRCLAS,'
at the Center for International Studies, as chair'
of the Harvard Academy for International Studies,'
or, more recently, as the Vice Provost'
for International Affairs.
So Jorge, we're so pleased that you could be with us tonight"
to introduce Mayor Mancera.
Thank you all very much.
It really is a pleasure to be with you here'
and particularly to be here with the mayor of Mexico City.'
I want to first take the opportunity'
to reaffirm what my friend Dean Mostafavi'
and my colleague and friend Diane Davis have done as well,'
but to try to do it briefly.
And it is to affirm this university's engagement"
with Mexico.
The good examples are, as Professor Davis just said,'
she has spent her professional career'
studying the city of Mexico and seeking to understand that'
in the context of other issues.
The last time I had the pleasure and the opportunity'
to spend several consecutive days with the dean'
was, in fact, about a year ago in Mexico City.'
The Graduate School of Design takes Mexico seriously,'
as does Harvard as well.
It's worth remembering that the David Rockefeller"
Center for Latin American studies'
has an office in Mexico City that'
seeks to support the faculty and the students who work there--'
including a number of my colleagues'
who are here in the room this evening.'
It's also worth mentioning, in the context"
of the experience of the United States of the last few months,'
one small fact.
25 years ago, the number of Mexican students at Harvard'
was 39.
2006, a year I remember because it'
was the year I became university Vice Provost,'
the number had gone up to 78.
And their most recent number is 124.'
When I was Vice Provost but also over the last few months,'
I am often asked the question, how many Mexicans'
should Harvard University have?
My answer in the past, as in recent months,'
has always been the same.
I have no idea of what that number might be,'
but I do know the right answer.
The right answer is a four letter word, more, more.'
This university has thrived and benefited'
by engaging with Mexico and with the people of Mexico,'
and this is very much a commitment'
that we expect to continue.
It's not just that we hope to continue."
It's that we expect to continue.
And though I am no longer university Vice Provost,'
I am confident that on this issue'
I speak for the president, the Provost, and the corporation.'
It really is an honor as well to salute Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, not'
only the first democratically elected mayor'
of the city of Mexico but a key architect'
of Mexico's democratization.
He has been to Harvard before, but it'
is particularly wonderful to have him here'
this evening as the first democratically elected mayor'
and the most recent democratically elected mayor'
Dr. Miguel Angel Mancera.
Dr. Mancera has had a distinguished career, in part,'
as an academic, as a professor, as an author'
in a variety of Mexico's leading universities."
He has been engaged as well in public service, in particular,'
in the city of Mexico, where he served with great distinction'
as attorney general of the city for four years'
before becoming mayor of the city in 2012.'
One way to describe his work is not just'
with particular examples, but we should remind each other,'
as I am sure the mayor will point out in his remarks,'
that this is a gigantic city.
And it is the city, as it has evolved over time,'
with extraordinary challenges--
challenges that are difficult for any mayor to address.'
He has addressed them very effectively.'
Whenever I have been in Mexico City--'
living in the city as I did a year ago for some months and I'
have at other times--
I have been impressed not only with the experience,'
the pleasures, of living in the city'
and those whom I meet and engage but also'
over time with the numerous circumstances where the mayor's"
effective leadership has been a significant factor in making'
Mexico City better, more effective, more livable, more'
successful.
And that is why we are celebrating his visit,'
honoring his presence, and giving him the podium.'
Good afternoon, good afternoon to all, and each one of you,'
all of you, and ladies and gentlemen.'
First of all, I'd like to thank Harvard this opportunity"
the University of Harvard, for me,'
is very exciting to listen the directors and the professors,'
the opinion they have of Mexico, Mexicans, and, of course,'
the great opportunities that we have exchange of ideas.'
I want to thank also Professor Mohsen because'
of his connections.
And now, Jorge Dominguez, thank you so much.'
Thank you for what you think of the city of Mexico'
and what you think of Mexico.
I'm very glad that at the auditorium we have so many"
distinguished guests, like Sergio Aguayo,'
like Antonio Azuela, like Miguel [INAUDIBLE] from which I'
greeted a few minutes ago--
Dr. Perlo.
Important people that I have helped'
and a lot of investigators that have helped us'
on many of the political tasks and also scientific'
in the city of Mexico.
I have the privilege and the honor'
that they are working with us--
the engineer Walter [INAUDIBLE].
He's an important figure like they said here,"
of the democratic part of the city of Mexico,'
and the task that they achieved in the city of Mexico.'
For the first time, the city of Mexico'
has a political constitution that'
gives the city the quality that we'll"
talk about later further ahead.
I'll talk to you fast, the way we're"
living in the city of Mexico, and what's the context,"
and how are city is, and some amounts that are important.'
I would say that for the government'
of the city of Mexico the theme of climatic change'
is a very serious point.
It's a theme that worries us, it compromises us,"
it compromises the city, and the future of the city,'
and the future of our children.
We are working every day to better'
the relationship and obviously what's"
going to happen in the future.
In the city of Mexico we have 1,500 square kilometers.'
The territory is not very big, but, however, we'
have officially 8.8 residents.
But, in reality, we give service approximately 16 or 17'
million citizens at the peak hour around noontime'
and further on.
And all of these people they go back'
after they have demanded services, security services,'
water services, et cetera.
In the metropolitan zone in the city of Mexico,'
daily, 5.3 million vehicles move around,'
and they consume approximately 3,489 million gallons of fuel.'
58% of this amount we utilize for transportation,'
26% for the industry, and 13% for the consumers,'
and 3% for the commerce.
We have a metro subway in the city of Mexico'
that transports daily more than 5 million people.'
225 kilometers of subway in the city of Mexico'
that has to be tended, has to be reactivated,'
and we have to make sure that it functions'
in a space of three hours from the moment that we disconnect'
and then the moment that it reconnects'
to give service the next day.
The city of Mexico has taken this compromise'
to fight the climatic change since 2014.'
Well, in reality, like 30 years ago,'
was the most contaminated city in the world.'
The government have been working constantly and taking'
measures that have cost too much money, but we did it that way.'
But they are indispensable to change this classification'
as being the city most contaminated in the world,'
depending on the gases and contamination.'
This, honestly, has been a big task.'
In the government, since 2014, we'
started work with a climatic program.'
We come from 2014 to 2020, and in this plan,'
the following administration will have two years'
to evaluate results and redesign the program'
with a new objective.
This program of a climatic action'
has two tasks-- the first one to mitigate'
10 million tons accumulated in 2020,'
and this is 40% more ambitious than what we wanted'
to do in the prior program.
And the second one is to reduce the vulnerability'
of 5.6 residents that are exposed'
to the impact of climate change in our city.'
For them, this program of climatic action,'
has 102 actions with seven strategic points.'
Each one of those actions one are'
going through a system in which we depend on the government,'
and they report each project.
Actually, we have 52% right now at mitigation goal.'
The vision, this is a trans-personal element'
given that we are convinced that the climatic change affects'
men and women.
We have identified 78 actions in this program focusing'
on reducing vulnerabilities.
And with the support of the agency, the German Agency, Giz,'
we have developed special indicators'
to measure the real impact that we are developing right now.'
The city of Mexico is an active part of the initiative C40'
to help the next generation in the fight'
against the climatic change.
In this task, the city of Mexico has taken very seriously'
part of the technology.
We are one of the first cities that we are'
measuring the carbon dioxide.
We monitor the metropolitan point,'
and we have applications with phones.'
We realize there's 95% of monitoring stations in the city"
that belong to the city even though they are'
in the metropolitan zone, and now we've"
launched the possibility to anticipate a contingency--'
anticipate 24 hours prior.
And the city will be in an environmental contingency.'
I want to tell you fast how the Mexico City passed measure'
in the contingencies.
Mexico City, in the '90s, had practically 400 points"
of contamination.
From the 400 points of contamination,'
in the period of the year 2000, we'
went to have 280, 285 points of contamination.'
We receive the administration with 185 to 210, more or less.'
Today, in the American union, we have'
cities that they have pre-contingencies.'
And once they get to this level we have alerts,'
and then they get into contingencies.'
In the city of Mexico, they retired this.'
[INAUDIBLE] is because the federal government establishes'
this, the city, they have to adjust.'
In the last adjustment they did they passed us'
from 185 to 150 points of contamination.'
It was a reduction of 30 points that we had to do from one day'
to the other.
We didn't have any previous notice."
We just had a new measurement as if we created a new form'
to quantify this.
If you weighed 80 kilograms you were going to go in weight,'
and then we had to adapt.
Fortunately, up until now, we have'
been able to face up until moment,'
we can say that we are in line.
We don't have pre-contingencies.
We go immediately to the contingencies.'
This places us in a situation of challenges'
of a higher challenge and also at larger advantage.'
That's why when you see Mexico, when"
you see this amount of vehicles, the amount of residents,'
the city of Mexico is not the most contaminated city'
in Mexico.
We are between 7th and 8th place in cities'
of contamination because of a series of measurements'
that we've taken.
Let's say that our city annually is creating"
20.6 tons of carbon dioxide.
And then the metropolitan zone, like the big city'
in the city of Mexico, let's say that it encompasses"
all the municipalities in the city of Mexico,'
they emit 56.1 million tons of contaminants.'
How do we know this?
This is very important because we have an inventory'
of gases contaminations.
We have an inventory of emissions.'
We are the first city to comply with this inventory'
of emissions.
Once they demanded this to us, we presented this.'
This means that every two years we'
are working on this inventory.
The inventory from 2014 was recognized'
for the [? pack ?] of mayors, like I mentioned,'
and we had 95% together with the city of Paris and Vancouver.'
This inventory indicates that sector of the city of Mexico,'
this is what contributes most to the emissions,'
61% of carbon dioxide and 1,793 of black carbon.'
It's a compound during the winter."
It deteriorates the quality of air'
and the health of the population.'
That's why, in this administration,"
we are working very hard to transform'
the mobility of the city.
We go from a design of integral transport,'
and we focus on the residence and not on the vehicles.'
It's not easy, but today we are doing it"
in a way that is consistent.
So what is this about?
We give priority to the system, VRP--'
like I said, in the system in the morning and the afternoon.'
I want to know what time it is right now where'
we are, but the Boston mayor--
we're going to talk about a little bit of this."
We are giving priority to this matter of mobility'
and focusing on individuals and not on vehicles.'
This matter, VRT in the city of Mexico,'
has taken us to build each time more lines.'
Because when we build a VRT in the city of Mexico,'
people get good news.
We make an intervention from street to street.'
We may get an intervention which we better'
all of the urban areas.
Also, the vegetation has a very important participation,'
and in which the buses go from four to one regarding all'
the types of transportation.
The difference between the VRT in the city of Mexico'
with other systems that we have observed in the country'
is that we retire all the vehicles that get old.'
If we place VRT--
that's the only transportation we have there"
that circulates in that zone.
Now we are working in the construction of line number'
seven.
The Reforma-- the people that know this area know what'
I'm talking about--
is a very important reach at more than 15 kilometers.'
And, at the same time, we are building line number five'
in these conditions as well to better transportation.'
And we have buses with the latest technology, two hybrids,'
and also, in some cases, in natural gas.'
This is the change that we're planning."
One other thing we did in the city of Mexico'
was through the [INAUDIBLE] to prohibit'
that they keep giving out concessions'
to taxis that are no electric taxis, or electric cars,'
or hybrid taxis.
With this, we are contributing to mitigating'
various tons of carbon dioxide, and also, it'
benefits the mobility of the city of Mexico and the users.'
With this, the life of the taxis, so the vehicles,'
would be like 10 years.
Every 10 years we'll be renovating"
the flotilla of these vehicles between 120,000 and 125,000'
taxis.
That's why it was really important for us."
Like any other huge city of urban development,'
our city impacts the generation of waste.'
What I'm going to comment about right"
now is what we generate in the city of Mexico'
when it comes to waste.
Most people don't believe 12 and 1/2 tons of trash day"
by day-- more than 12,000 tons of trash a day.'
They used to take the trash to all these different places.'
We have a place that we have intervened'
in which we have millions of tons of trash in landfills,'
and they generate gas and energy.'
But in this administration, we'll launch a program."
It's called Trash Zero, and this administration--"
because actually we're working with 6,000 tons of trash."
We are working with compost and transformation of the same'
trash, which it takes us to-- because of the numbers that'
the city produces, this 6,000 tons of trash daily--'
we're taking the trash from Leon, Tijuana,"
or any huge city in our country completely.'
However, we are at 50%.
Today, we are practically at the last steps of a program'
that we've been taking care of with many organizations"
with ONG, the environment, to have a plant--'
one of the biggest plants, one of the most modern plants'
in the world of thermal valorization.'
This will be two plants that, together, they'
will be processing 5,000 tons of trash'
or refuse daily more or less, and this'
will permit us to finish with this matter, this theme'
of the trash, because we don't want to give this trash."
And also the trash has a political impression as well.'
That's why we have this project Trash Zero that you'll"
be listening to with more frequency'
because it is advancing fast, and this'
will be an example for all of Latin America.'
And, on the other side, on July 8 of this year,'
we are going to establish the new norm of the environment,'
Norm C24, technical specifications in which we'
will do a separation of trash.
We are looking to increase a cultural environment, not only'
technology but also structuring actions of technology.'
Also, we are looking to educate the society,'
to educate the population, and that's"
why in the separation of trash each time we work even harder.'
But if we don't push this, this will never happen."
The situation will be the same.
That's why we're working with this."
This is a norm, and this will be, obviously, obligatory'
to do it this way.
One more action that has to do with hospitals.'
Even if you don't believe it, and I didn't believe it either,"
but our hospitals, some of them were working with diesel.'
The furnaces were working with diesel.'
We have a compromise with Paris to finish the use of diesel'
in the city of Mexico.
One of the obstacles is with the public transportation and also'
our heaters.
We have 32 hospitals in the city of Mexico,'
and the 32 hospitals they are trying'
to work with clean energy in the treatment'
of the furnaces, the heaters.
And also we took this norm that will be a pioneer system.'
We're going to work also with the matter of the jails."
Everything that has to do with furnaces and heaters,'
everything that has to do with energy,'
we are transforming this in the city of Mexico'
towards renewable energy.
This is the first city that has a contract'
to provide just the metro part of the city of Mexico'
what they waste--
the city of Mexico, 225 kilometers--'
we could light up a whole city in our territory.'
That's why we are connecting now to have energy, oil"
energy, and hydraulic energy.
In 2014, with the support of the International'
Agency for Developing in the US, we started this program.'
I'm sure you can recognize this.
This program, we are developing this project in the hospitals'
of the city of Mexico and also the one'
that we're going to achieve this reduction--"
very important.
Also, one more part of this initiative'
will be with the United Nations, which'
is like sustainable energy better known as the SEforALL.'
It has more than 1,400 business leaders,'
and we are implementing a pilot project on energy efficiency.'
With WEIR, we are starting the second phase'
of building to develop something called the retrofit--'
like illumination.
All of the building we are building are very modern,'
and they're following the classification [? LIT. ?]"
All of the buildings will give us a substantial benefit'
in the homes that we are--
the construction rules in the city of Mexico,'
they have to follow the norms of the city of Mexico.'
Houses for more than 100 square meters,'
they have to install solar heating systems--'
and also establishing industrial sites'
like offices 35% on top of the benefits for the environment.'
We also have a compromise in the searching of solutions'
that will also help us to mitigate,'
but also we're going to better the infrastructure of the city."
We need a citizenship that understands,'
that worries about, to combat, to fight the climate change.'
If you would ask me how was the winter in the city of Mexico?'
I will tell you we didn't have a winter."
We didn't have a moment in which we had cold."
And now we are in Boston, and this afternoon'
of, like, winter and spring--
this theme of climatic change--
I believe that all of us will live in this.'
I really don't know when we're going to get snow."
At any moment, it could happen.
That's why we are taking these actions of education"
and communication to help the citizenship'
to have strategic planning.
And we have some actions that we do'
in a consistent way like, for instance, the Barter Market.'
It's an initiative that we started four years ago."
You can see that right there.
It's not a Walmart.
This is something that we set up in Chapultepec,'
in the city of Mexico.
And then we do it precisely, so they'
can separate all the waste to be taken'
to all these different centers.
And they take this to their homes.'
There are a few advantages.
These are local products, and it generates a lot of empathy.'
As you can see right there they have a little children,'
and the kids, that are taking their parents,'
are the ones that are waiting for the barter market.'
So what is this about?
They are more informed than we are.'
That's exactly what we're looking"
for with this type of action.
But it's functioning.
It's working really well like everything"
that happens in the city of Mexico in a huge way.'
This is just a small part.
All of the tables they have to install in this type of action.'
We also are pushing the separation of electronic trash.'
It's a system of recycling where we take and receive"
electronic elements, electronic instruments,'
so people don't throw them out.
So these things won't contaminate."
We have installed 400 columns of collections of batteries--'
376 tons of used batteries that we have recuperated,'
and we have 72 schools that form a part of this program.'
And when it comes to mobility in the city of Mexico,'
we were going to announce in the morning--'
at the School of Law we're talking about these actions."
It's called ECOBICI in the city of Mexico."
It's a program in which this is a Sunday"
and people are participating in a very active way.'
This is called the Pastel de Reforma.'
In totality, we have more than 250,000 participants.'
In a very consistent way, I would'
say between 50,000 and 60,000.
And we have places of gathering where we these actions'
are very important.
We have a program--
this is a school.
This has given us huge results starting with the children,'
with the kids, what you see right now.'
It's a busy parking in which the city of Mexico"
is building the third one in which they'
have thousands of users of these busy parking places.'
They have given us great results.'
They are located at the metro stations'
in which they could transfer in a very, very efficient way.'
In truth, with our system of bicycles'
we are reaching a very important potential.'
We have 65,000 bikes.
We are below New York, but we are'
competing with New York with the number of bicycles'
in the area, number of bicycle stations, with the advantage'
that in the city of Mexico they use it more'
for work and for mobility.
And these places, let's say, like the fourth system"
at rural level, in the use of bicycles,'
approximately, we are going to widen this program,'
and also bring electrical bicycles in which we'
have a traffic jam.
That is very important.
This will improve this part of the strategy.'
Resilience, they didn't understand it well in the city."
People didn't know that the city of Mexico, we are a living lab."
We have the possibility of floods just like Buenos Aires.'
I was just there with a colleague of mine'
regarding this flood issue, but we'
have the possibility also of an earthquake like in Chile'
or anywhere in America.
We also have the possibility of very, very hard winds.'
More than 70 trees were just taken from the root.'
All of these things, in the concept of resilience,'
you can do all the studies you want.'
That's why we work with the Rockefeller Foundation."
We are one of the 30 principal cities that'
formed part of the strategy.
Of 100 cities, the compromise that we have'
is based on strategic themes to build resiliency.'
Basically, that it has to do with the coordination'
of regions, the construction of resilience, water resilience.'
And also, as a matter of fact, when I got to this building,'
I was talking to the water needs that the city of Mexico has.'
The city of Mexico, we were an island,'
and we tried to get all the water out.'
And then we took the water out, so we could have streets.'
And now we're thinking about how are we"
going to get the water back.
It keeps being like a lagoon.
And then when it rains, if we don't have a drainage system,"
we have a very important complication.'
13,000 kilometers of water and 12,000 kilometers of drainage,'
and so basically we have 25,000 kilometers'
to tend to every single day with the water system'
in the city of Mexico.
That's why this matter of the resiliency"
is indispensable to our city.
Today, we have this task that has'
to do with what I talked to you about with the climatic change.'
With the rains in the city of Mexico,'
a year ago, we would say we could have initial rain,'
but first, we have floods.
So now we have so much of the city that is flooded.'
In the past, we would say we have unusual showers.'
Now they're more usual.
In truth, I really don't know which one is usual or unusual."
Now we have thunderstorms.
Well, the city of Mexico has a conservation platform.'
Some people would say, is this in the city of Mexico?'
Yes, that's part that we're going to recoup,"
in which we have effective interventions.'
It's a city that has 60% of conservation"
that sadly we didn't plan, and we allowed--"
that most of these areas were invaded--'
that now we are in a process of recuperating,'
we have more than 600 hectares of zones that were invaded.'
If we don't take care of this, this zone"
will be invaded by the whole city.'
And now we are giving strength to environmental services.'
So, in other words, we have to pay the people that live there,'
so they can take care of and also improve this area'
to conserve it in their plan of resiliency.'
Basically, this is south of the city.'
This is the objective, to recuperate the system,'
to avoid these impacts that are created by climatic change.'
We're working on drainage systems and also storing water."
All of these are thousands of thousands'
of dollars or millions of dollars'
to be able to do these actions.
We can do it in a simple way.
To be able to deal with this climatic change'
we're looking at diverse forms of financing also"
with Michael Bloomberg.
And we have a period, he would say, why don't you just request"
this funding, the green funds.
The only green thing that I know is like the grass'
because the green funds don't exist."
Where are these green funds--
their place in the government?
We have to change his focus.
So the financial institutions need'
to support more local governments,'
so we can implement this task.
And this doesn't go to the local government in the strategies"
that we need to be able to face the situation.'
So then you have to go look for the financing,'
but when you want these projects you'
have to go through the federal government'
to go through a bank to be able to work on the resources.'
To get to our objective regarding resiliency'
we are talking about $7.2 billion.'
If you transferred this from now to 70 years from now, probably,'
this amount, it will be enormous.'
That's why it is important, so we could"
have a new way of financing.
The government of the city has launched a few strategies.'
Today, we have a fund for climatic change.'
In 2016, it was 5.8 million pesos.'
And the city of Mexico, today, has the first green fund.'
It passed last December 7.
You can see this.
Last December 7, our city was converted,'
and the first city of Latin America'
to admit a green bond in the stock exchange.'
This will be only focusing--
we achieved this with the Mexican stock exchange.'
So this year we compromised ourselves to bring more reach'
to this amount.
Instead of a billion, we want to get to 1.5 billion,'
or I would say $80 billion.
I don't know how the change goes."
Let's hope that the change won't be that aggressive."
$75 million invested in this project of the green bonds--'
we are very pleased that the city of Mexico'
was recognized with this instrument'
because, specifically, for our program of climatic action'
up until 2020 to be able to mitigate this 10 million tons.'
That's why I would say now, with the Constitution,"
this is the first constitution that is doing some publicity.'
Because the first constitution in the city of Mexico,'
within itself, some of these tasks in other times,'
it would have been very difficult to do.'
With Article 16, it talks about the territoriality ordinance.'
It talks about, exclusively, to the environment.'
I want to explain to you why we require this biodiversity,'
and how we have to minimize the ecological change.'
It talks about environmental services,'
and everything that I talked to you about'
is within this article.
It has a specific part of vulnerability and mitigation'
of risk, and it has a specific part'
of the care of the environment for the mayor's office."
It's a transversal obligation in the whole constitution--"
the environment.
This is one of the most modern systems in Latin America.'
They come from the Academy.
They come from many of the studies'
that they are doing right now.
I believe that now, our governments, we'
have an obligation not to ignore--'
regarding this fight with the climatic change--'
some people say, well, that's just in your imagination."
This is something that we made up.'
We are convinced that the climatic change, it does'
exist indeed, and we live in the consequences.'
When we are faced with nature we see the power of nature.'
We see the destructive power of nature, destruction'
that we have generated in ourselves.'
And this is important that we place everything, all'
our resources, technology, knowledge,'
innovation, to the service of the environment.'
We can talk about many of the political issues.'
We can talk about the task.
We can plant many, many actions.
Today, we can still do it.
We can sit down and discuss this at Harvard'
regarding climatic change.
We can read books.
We can do some urban planning.
We can do some financial calculations to give'
sustainability to the cities.
But the moment in which we don't take care of this"
then we are going to have nothing.'
We're going to end up without a planet, without cities,"
we are going to end up with nothing-- nothing'
to take care of.
There's nothing else to say afterwards."
The city of Mexico has this compromise.'
It's a small territory of our country,"
but this a city that has a demand of services'
and this participation in the task of climate change.'
That's why we're very glad that we can present"
this task, indeed, with a lot of satisfaction to be able to talk'
to you about it here at Harvard, so we'
can try to find more solutions to the ones we have.'
Again, I want to thank this prestigious university'
for the opportunity, the teachers that are helping us,'
and also the shared strategies in which, here, Harvard, we're"
talking about the environment and also the health in which we'
are doing a transversal line regarding a mobility health'
environment the government finances'
and absolutely all of the areas of planning,'
so we can get to this objective.
I didn't know that all that work that we"
do that will be indispensable to be'
able to fight climate change.
And the city of Mexico is compromised to work with it,'
and I'm very happy that I could come here"
in this winter afternoon with you'
at such a prestigious university at Harvard.'
Thank you very much.
Good afternoon.
Good evening.
Thank you so much.
Dr. Mancera, for this detailed information,'
our purpose is to start briefly and also'
to open the possibility that you can formulate questions.'
Listening to your position from the beginning of your talk,'
we have the theme of public transportation.'
And one doubt is how the government of the city--'
how are they organized to decide which'
are the projects of intervention in public transportation'
that they have to establish.
What priorities do they have to establish?'
There's a lot of demand, but we can't do everything"
all at once.
How are we going to determine the financing?'
What is interesting to me is to understand exactly'
how the government, how is the mayor'
going to organize to help decide projects, priorities,'
and financing?
From the huge budget in the city of Mexico'
that is approximately 170 million--'
let me do the conversion in dollars.'
It would be 170 million pesos.
From there, you have huge different amounts'
for $10 billion for each project.'
This $10 billion, we have to take the whole amount'
for the whole city.
Michael Bloomberg, I talked to him about this budget,'
and he said, well, how come the city of Mexico'
has such a small budget.
So then you have to decide each one,'
you know, where are you going to allocate that money?'
We have a public transportation that is within the city.'
This is approximately 600 buses, and then with these buses'
we are renovating in which we compromised'
to renovate the system.
At the end, the government will have only the latest generation'
buses.
This is a compromise regarding the budget.'
Then we have the metro, the subway.'
In the metro, the subway, the investments'
are multibillion dollar investments because Mexico,'
regarding the transfers of technology,'
we are beginning to start.
Now we'll be manufacturing trains,"
but we have to keep buying them.
We have to buy trains from France, Spain, and China.'
This implies a large expense to be able to do this project.'
For instance, the metro, the subway, we need also,'
the federal government has to participate.'
In this exercise, we have canceled, more or less,'
three projects because we don't have the means because"
of all the cutbacks.
This affects the city of Mexico in a huge way'
because we should have closed this government'
from 225 to 250 kilometers.
Practically, we had to close 260 kilometers,'
and we'll be closing 131, which is a reduction."
If we don't take into account this, we'll get to the point"
that we will not be able to do this because the maintenance is'
very expensive.
And also, this is regarding concessions.'
So what did the government do?
They published an instruction, so they'
would have only taxis that are hybrid and electrical.'
We are getting financing.
Taxi drivers understand now that it's"
much more economic to have a hybrid car even though they're"
more expensive, but then they have a larger earning capacity.'
And it allows them to work in a much more comfortable way.'
This project will take about 10 years.'
The city of Mexico will be working with only these taxis,'
hybrid cars and electric cars.
The best thing that we have in this city'
is that, a few years back, the vans.'
We have prohibited the use of vans.'
We're not going to have any more microbuses or vans."
How many of these do we require?
We need to eliminate at least 30,000 at this moment.'
At this moment, we need to eliminate around around 13,000'
still.
And to substitute, in the case of metro bus,'
from four to one regarding other transportation from two'
to three to one, which will help the city,'
and also to generate a better infrastructure.'
So who is going to invest?
The other problem is the tariffs.'
The tariffs in the city of Mexico'
are the lowest tariffs in the world--'
China also, but, you know, more or less, the same price.'
In the city of Mexico, it's like 25 pesos,"
which is like a quarter--
$25.
And it doesn't allow us to get better,"
but the government subsidizes.
We are servicing the metropolitan zone.'
To millions of people, it's a complex topic."
But the focus that we have in this city'
is to provide, to give more importance to the pedestrians,'
to the transportation that is not authorized,'
and substitute to public transportation'
to be able to have a better option and a better option'
when it comes to traveling.
One second question, and then I'd"
like to invite other people too, you mentioned just now'
in this answer--
the challenges of coordinating the government'
and the federal government.
And also, in your speech, you said'
that the green funds they go to the federal government, not'
the government in the city.
In a federal system in which the city, the capital'
of the country where the federal government is located,'
where a huge part of the people that utilizes the services.'
How, without limiting ourselves to the topic'
to the transportation, which would'
be a good example of something that'
has functioned rather well in the relationship'
between the federal government and the government of the city?'
Which would be a theme or a topic'
that you would say it could be better?'
Well, this question is not easy.
What has functioned well--
we're talking about mobility?
No, no, we're talking about any topic"
regarding your speech, your exposition,'
to give you more freedom.
I don't want to tie you up.
I believe honestly that the city of Mexico'
they haven't helped it the way they"
should have-- something that we achieved'
in this administration.
Obviously, something that we didn't have because it didn't"
exist, was the capital fund.
It's an acknowledgement to the city of Mexico,"
the capital of the republic, 70% of all manifestation'
or strikes--
75% is for a federal problem.
Every time there's a strike in the city of Mexico"
they do a great job in security and mobility.'
And the political border to city is high.'
We achieve to have a fund.
We have had a chapter that is obligatory in which we can move'
because of the deputies, the congressman,'
we have in a different part.
And this has allowed us to--
they lowered it to a couple of million,'
and then they keep lowering this.'
We require to have a law.
It's called a law of coordination."
But we this fund.
Let's say that this was a very important achievement."
Something that has functioned, in my opinion,'
is the metro, the subway.
The federal government requires to have someone'
that would understand this need, the mobility'
in the metropolitan area.
Because the metro, the subway, today is providing services'
to many municipalities.
Moreover, more than five or six million people'
that use the metro, the subway, in the city of Mexico,'
40% of usage is the state of Mexico.'
When they get to Mexico they spend between 20 and 25 pesos,'
and then they get on the subway, and it only costs five pesos.'
The care, the maintenance, everything's"
covered by the city of Mexico.
I believe there is a flaw here.
Now they sent $24 million to the train in Toluca,'
and, compared to this, that other train'
has nothing to do with the metro in the city of Mexico.'
Because I don't know, for instance,"
if you've been to see Ecatepec.
I'm sure you didn't, but if you go to the city of Mexico,"
if you go to [? Bellas ?] [? Artes ?] or go to different'
places, the cost benefit there in that train is located'
at a station.
So that's what is going to give the train, the system,"
viability.
Those $24 million, we're talking about, we should have built--"
each station, it costs $2 billion.'
We are going to invite--
If you have a question, please just'
give your name and a brief description of who you are.'
Let's hear it.
I am Enrique Cifuentes.
I am a Mexican.
I worked at Harvard for more than eight years.'
And one of the things that I want to ask'
is the transparency, the corruption,'
is a theme that goes through many things--'
you know, the environment and everything'
that you can see in Mexico, and there's nothing"
that we should be ashamed of.
Our country, this country, is going'
through a horrible crisis.
It's not a problem of just only Mexico, so what"
else do we need to do in Mexico to be able to have transparency'
and to be able to--
that all the money that is spent in the train in Toluca'
is used for the city?
I believe that there's something in the Constitution--"
it's called the Institute of [? Planification-- ?]"
that will allow the citizenship to be'
aware of the plans of the city.
I'm sure that at this Institute of [? Planification ?]"
they talk about the infrastructure.'
In one of the articles in our constitution'
there is this position that 22% of the budget from the mayor's"
office has to be used for infrastructure.'
Today, it's just 1%, or you can send 10%."
It's very difficult to find something"
that gets to the 22% or 30% to the material of infrastructure,'
but we have this tendency.
So what is the city of Mexico?
I am convinced that the transparency'
is a very effective tool to combat, to fight corruption.'
Like the 1313 declarations or we're working with OCP."
We have a contract with OCP and with Bloomberg'
to work with open contracts, so we could have,'
in real time, how is the contracts in the government'
in the city, and so for the citizens'
to have an interaction.
Let's say the steps that we've taken--"
also, we have created a judicial system that absolutely protects'
us in this way, and then we'll have to,"
little by little, it'll get purer and purer."
I believe that this is in that direction'
that it's going in the way we are creating this Constitution,"
and we'll see the results.
And we're also talking to the citizens"
as well, so they can get involved with the government.'
And this will be a different step that'
will take us to a different result.'
If not, it will never change.
I should have said that you could'
ask a question with whatever language'
you feel comfortable with.
Yes?
My name is Cynthia [INAUDIBLE].
You said the transportation is a system that infrastructure'
in the environment which would be the theme in which Mexico'
has achieved this articulation, this metropolitan change,'
within the different jurisdictions'
of the same region.
Well, we have, at this moment, sadly,'
we have various metropolitan zones in a country.'
The biggest metropolitan zone that'
has the most residents, that we are reaching more than 25'
million people, is where we have the city of Mexico.'
We have the city of Mexico, the state of Mexico,'
and then we have the state of Hidalco'
with so many municipalities.
Now, this, we call it--
it's not a metropolis, but it's megalopolis"
because you are including other territories'
that the city of Mexico did not consider.'
We did this because of the environment in which ways'
this works with the agreements that we have because we still'
have to prove, at the end, everything'
is a political theme.
Like to verify, we have to monitor the different forms'
of the environment, and also, we have'
to set up the public transportation,'
and also work on the budget.
This also, it hasn't reached this level."
In some cities they say, we don't have"
a problem with the environment.
They say the only city that has a problem'
is the city of Mexico.
But, up until then, because the decisions that we have to take'
are not very popular.
And also, the scientific part, we still have a few glitches.'
So I believe in Mexico, in our zone,'
what is allowing us to advance is this part that'
has to do with the environment because we have reached'
an agreement that this metropolitan zone, the majority'
of the budget in the city of Mexico'
because they say that there are more residents.'
Well, we have to give Mexico more money in the budget'
because they have more residents,'
but the city of Mexico provides more services.'
But why does the city of Mexico have that many residents?'
Because land is more expensive.
So people live outside the city of Mexico,'
but they come into the city of Mexico.'
So in the formula we haven't reached an agreement."
It will be a while because those formulas,'
they move completely the participation'
of the federal resources and the support.'
Tomorrow, Salomon is going to explain another topic.'
No, the airport in the city of Mexico.'
So what's going to happen with the airport"
in the city of Mexico when we build the airport?'
We're talking about 300 acres.
What are we going to do with this land?'
The International Airport in the city of Mexico'
will be in the state of Mexico.
The land of the city of Mexico, we're"
going to use that to finance.
So what are we going to do with those acres, with this land?'
This is another metropolitan decision,'
and some people are talking about this.'
We're talking about a theme that has"
to do with education because this city is'
a city of universities.
We are starting studies.
We want to have a great experience.'
We went to have success like other cities in the world.'
We know that the airports cannot co-exist.'
We have to leave one and then build another one.'
I don't think that that's the way it should be."
So then, in a metropolitan way, which works,'
it's called commission of the megalopolis."
Hello, good evening.
I am Professor Sanchez, thank you.'
My name is Ramon Sanchez.
I come from the School of Public Health at Harvard,'
and I worked here for six years.
My question comes from regarding the benefits.'
You mentioned the environmental benefits--'
you mentioned 433,000 tons of carbon dioxide,'
376 tons of batteries, 715 tons of electronic waste,'
780 tons of just waste.
And the program of energy and the reduction of trash'
that you want to reduce from 12,080 tons a day--'
you want to reduce it to 50%.
So my question is the following.
Why are you not mentioning the impact on the health?'
You know, the lives that are saved,'
lives were saved because of reduction'
of this emission, the toxicity that is reduced when'
the batteries are collected--
do we have a program to monitor all these impacts?'
Yes, we have a program.
We have a commission.
Like I was saying, the commission of megalopolis.'
We have insisted a lot because when'
they passed the measurement from 200 to 250, the only argument'
that we had with the citizens, because people could not'
circulate, the reaction was really violent.'
This was a theme of public health,'
but, however, regarding the commission of megalopolis,'
we insisted that the Secretary of Health had to be involved.'
Today, the Secretary of Health is involved.'
So what did we do?
We formed a council in which we have the people'
around the university, the Polytechnic Institute,'
where we have all these huge important people that'
are analyzing the effects and the health of the citizens.'
For instance, we used to tell the society,'
we are taking these measures because your health is in play.'
And then people would say, well, that's not true."
You're making this up.
Today, we have clear data.
We have the Secretary of Health of the city of Mexico working,'
and the way how it has benefited the city'
and how it has impacted the people that are hurt the most'
are the children under six years old,'
pregnant women, and older people that are healthy that'
have respiratory problems.
It affects them the most.
People needed to have an authority when'
it comes to health because if you say, you know, as the boss,'
it seems like it's more political than anything."
But yes, we have measured.
Dr. [? Aware, ?] in all of the reports,'
we have presented all these results'
with the debts, people that are sick,'
regarding the climatic changes.
Yeah, we are doing this with a project with the collaboration'
of the Harvard School of Public Health,'
and we are also finding exactly what is the impact.'
We're doing many things, and briefly, we"
are going to publish a report.
Thank you very much.
My name is Ana Villarreal.
I'm a sociologist.
And I was a driver in a route in Monterrey,'
so I'm interested regarding the drivers, what"
is the relationship between the bus drivers?'
I think this is a very complex negotiation.'
And if you could tell me a little bit more'
about the subject?
The point of the city of Mexico, I'm"
going to talk briefly about the trash.'
We want to get to like zero trash.'
We have 50% less trash.
We are trying to reach the other 50% using the other programs.'
The law of mobility was key.
What it says is the concessions for public transportation,'
we only have to give them if they are a known business.'
So we change the concept of having a private driver.'
If someone wants to have a transportation concession'
they can only do it by getting to a partnership'
with a business.
Because if they want to change a microbus,'
or a van, or a small bus, so the city tells them'
they can only have a hybrid bus or an electric bus.'
So instead of 150,000 pesos, we're talking about $10,000."
He's going to have to spend $500,000."
So that that will be the difference'
this person, an independent contractor,'
will not be able to face this personally,'
but he will be able to do it as a business.'
So when we place a BRT in any of the zones, all of the people'
there have to form a society, and we take everyone.'
So sometimes they have a BRT, but they'
continue functioning with the other transportation'
because that is not correct because it doesn't"
reduce the contamination.
Our objective in the city of Mexico'
is just to create this intervention'
to take out all of the old vehicles'
because that unit that goes south for recycling'
is not recycled.
Last question.
My name is [INAUDIBLE] I'm Mexican."
I'd like to know what are the concrete actions"
that the government of the city of Mexico,'
or the government of the city [INAUDIBLE] Mexico,'
will take to educate the residents to separate'
the trash instead of giving our trash to people in carts'
to give the trash to the government.'
But each time we are widening the barter system'
we are buying, also, the units because this'
was another problem.
The garbage trucks that we had, we found garbage trucks'
from like 1970.
Could you imagine?
They didn't have any technology that would allow us to--"
now we have buses, garbage trucks from 2016'
that have separators.
They separate the trash in a more efficient way.'
People are separating the trash.
We are going to reinforce this norm.'
It will be obligatory to separate the trash.'
We will only collect the trash according'
to some special calendars.
Thousands of people will contribute and much more'
in all the city halls that will have to implement these rules.'
I calculate, in around a couple of years'
after we implement this norm, this law,'
will be much more effective like I said before.'
The new house in the new generations'
in the city of Mexico, they are growing with this theme,'
with this topic, you know, solar energy.'
And the kids are helping in the change in the way of thinking--'
in the way that they will make us, adults, change.'
Thank you so much for everything.'
Thank you so much for answering all these questions,'
and thank you so much for your leadership and for your time.'
Thank you, professor-- very kind.'
