I'm Chris Herbert.
I'm the managing director of the Joint Center"
for Housing Studies.
And on behalf of the Joint Center,'
it's my privilege to welcome distinguished faculty"
and guests, students, and the broader Cambridge community'
to the 18th John T. Dunlop lecture.'
Each year, the Dunlop lecture provides us'
with an opportunity to recall and pay'
tribute to Professor Dunlop for his many important'
contributions to the worlds of academia, policy, and industry.'
John was a remarkable man, marked'
by a tremendous intellect, a shrewd vision,'
unflagging energy, and an impatience to get things done,'
which I experienced a bit as a grad student'
watching him deal with Jim Brown of the Joint Center.'
He applied these skills in a long and distinguished career'
over the span of many decades as a scholar, a dean, a mediator,'
a labor secretary, and an advisor'
to presidents of both the US and of Harvard.'
But among his many accomplishments,'
Professor Dunlop was also instrumental'
in providing support and guidance for the Joint Center'
from its founding in 1959 through the end'
of his life in 2003.
Professor Dunlop recognized the importance'
of having a center at Harvard that keeps a consistent focus'
on housing, given the fundamental role'
that decent, affordable homes play as a foundation'
for the well-being of families and individuals,'
as a critical element of healthy and vital communities,'
and as an engine of economic growth.'
It's not an exaggeration to say that without Professor Dunlop's"
unwavering vision and persistent efforts on behalf'
of the center, we probably wouldn't be here today."
And so this lecture is a small but important way'
of marking our gratitude for all that he'
did to help the center pursue our mission of advancing'
the understanding of housing and forming policy'
and training the next generation of housing leaders.'
Over its history, the Dunlop lecture'
has featured a variety of perspectives'
on critical housing issues, offering'
a platform for distinguished leaders from academia,'
from homebuilding, from finance, from advocacy, and policy.'
And looking over the list of past lectures'
provides a portrait of the housing issues'
that have been most salient since the start'
of this century, when the lecture series began.'
And while the housing challenges facing'
the country are unfortunately numerous,'
in planning this year's lecture, the choice"
of theme to highlight was obvious'
given the timing of the lecture, which'
coincides with the anniversary of the enactment of the Fair'
Housing Act, signed into law exactly 50 years ago tomorrow'
by President Lyndon Johnson on April 11, 1968, one'
week after Martin Luther King Jr. was killed in Memphis.'
Over the last half-century, there's"
been some progress in breaking down'
barriers to more integrated communities, as evidenced'
by what could be described as modest declines in segregation'
across much of the country.
But nonetheless, racial and ethnic segregation'
remains quite high, particularly in urban areas'
in the Northeast and Midwest.
And importantly, segregation is associated'
with a significant concentration of poor minorities'
in areas of concentrated poverty.'
A growing body of social science research'
has found that these patterns have significant repercussions'
for the well-being and life chances'
of those who live in these communities.'
In addition, there's good evidence"
that a lack of interaction between'
racial and ethnic groups contributes'
to prejudice and mistrust.
In short, segregation matters for individuals'
affected by this and for the broader society.'
However, the forces producing segregation'
by race and ethnicity and income are arguably different today'
than they were 50 years ago.
As studies by HUD have found, overt discrimination'
is much less evident.
But the historical legacy of past discrimination'
lives on in today's residential patterns,"
in economic inequality, and how choices'
are made about where to live.
As a result, if we're to have meaningful improvement"
in reducing segregation, it'll take more"
than simply removing discriminatory barriers.'
It will require affirmative steps'
to promote integration, which is something the Fair Housing Act'
itself recognized when enacted 50 years ago.'
So as we considered who to invite'
to reflect on the past, the present, and the future'
of fair housing, our thoughts turned immediately'
to Raphael Bostic, president of the Federal Reserve'
Bank of Atlanta.
Raphael's an obvious choice to deliver the Dunlop lecture"
in part because his own career mirrors Professor Dunlop's"
distinguished contributions to the worlds of academia, policy,'
and practice.
Until his appointment last year as president of the Atlanta'
Fed, Raphael was Judith and John Bedrosian Chair'
in Governance and Public Enterprise'
at the Sol Price School of Public Policy at the University'
of Southern California.
He's also a Harvard undergrad, so we probably"
like to take credit for everything'
he's done since then.
Through his academic career, his research'
has spanned many fields, including homeownership,'
housing finance, neighborhood change, and the roles'
of institutions in shaping policy effectiveness,'
all of which have strong connections'
to the questions related to fair housing and integration.'
He also served as Assistant Secretary to Policy Development'
and Research at HUD under Shaun Donovan,'
who we're very pleased to have with us here tonight, as well,"
an old friend and a Joint Center alum.'
And importantly, while serving as assistant secretary,'
Raphael played a key role in developing regulations'
for communities receiving HUD funding regarding steps needed'
to make good on the Fair Housing Act's mandate"
to firmly further fair housing.
And in his leadership role now at the Atlanta Fed,'
which includes serving on the Federal Open Market Committee,'
he now wields significant influence'
over the direction of federal financial policy'
and how it can serve all the nation's communities."
And for those of us who know him and his work,'
we're grateful to have someone of his intellect,"
his perspective, and his judgment in that role.'
There's no doubt that Professor Dunlop would"
have been tremendously gratified to have President'
Bostic delivering today's lecture"
to help remember his legacy and to speak to such'
an important policy issue.
So it's with great honor and pleasure I introduce to you"
Raphael Bostic to deliver this year's lecture."
[applause]
Thank you, Chris, for a very kind introduction.'
Good evening, everyone.
Good evening.
So this is one thing I do now.
I'm in the South, so we try to be friendly."
So good evening, everyone.
Good evening.
It's good to be here.
I want to thank the Joint Center for inviting'
me to speak here tonight.
This is quite an honor to get offered to give this lecture.'
On the back of the program, there's"
a list of previous speakers, and it's quite a list."
Jonathan Reckford, he's on my board"
right now at the bank, a definite leader.'
Jonathan Rose, I serve with him on a board at Enterprise'
Community Partners.
And he's an innovator in the field of affordable housing."
My former boss, Shaun, is here.
So to have my name on this list is really quite an honor.'
It's also very nice to be--
so this is also another way for me to feel at home.'
Technology always seems to mess up when I'm standing behind it."
So we'll just keep going.
This is also very nice to be back on campus.'
I've always had a warm spot in my heart for Harvard."
It's a place that gave me access to a life and a trajectory"
I wouldn't have had otherwise.
And so it's always good to come back, support the institution,"
and do all that I can to really make sure'
that this place continues to be a leader in thought'
and in policy around the things that'
are important for our society.
We should try to move this lecture to June.'
So I've lived in LA for a long time."
And then going to Atlanta, this is'
kind of a shock to the system, the drizzle and the gray.'
But--
You know Harvard's closed.
Huh?
You know Harvard's closed.
Yeah, we're going to open it up.
You have pull here, so make it happen.'
And then there's some irony to me giving this talk"
on this topic, in the sense that there'
are many people in this room who have'
worked on this subject for a very long time.'
And so for me to be giving this talk,'
I feel like I should be in the audience'
and learning from others.
But I will do my best, and we'll see how it goes."
So tonight, my topic is fair housing.'
It's something that I have worked on for a while."
And most notably, in recent years,'
I spent a fair amount of time working'
on the reform of the Affirmatively Furthering Fair'
Housing rule.
I'm going to talk a bit more about that in a little bit."
But I've also been involved in some of the enforcement"
activities, as well.
So Fair Housing Act started in 1968.'
It really was an outgrowth of a lot of civil rights energy'
and activity.
And it's not an accident that it passed on April 11."
This was a direct response to the assassination'
of Martin Luther King, Jr. And that impetus'
was actually quite important, getting us'
over the finish line.
Now, it was necessary because markets were not working,'
and free markets were not working'
for a large number of people.
And the act really charged HUD, the new Department'
of Housing and Urban Development,'
with taking a leading role to try'
to get markets to work a little better, get housing'
to be more accessible and more easily attained'
for the full range of the American public.'
It charged HUD with doing two things.'
First was affirmatively furthering fair housing,'
and the second was eliminating discrimination'
by enforcing anti-discrimination laws.'
And it's an interesting and important juxtaposition."
One was the enforcement.
We were trying to stop activities'
from happening that were preventing people'
to have access.
But the other was actually to be affirmative,'
to be positive in the space and to take actions'
to make sure and ensure that every American had'
true access to safe, high-quality,'
and affordable housing.
And so today, what I want to do is'
spend a fair amount of time talking'
about how we've done in both those spaces,"
how have we done where enforcement is concerned,'
and then what's happening on the affirmative side."
And I do think that it's important for me--"
Shawn asked me to do this affirmatively furthering thing,'
and I didn't really understand what I was getting into."
It was quite a wrestling match inside the building'
because affirmatively acting is inherently'
a non-compliant activity.
You're trying to get people to do things"
because they want to do it.
If you drag people into things and you force them to do it,'
which is an enforcement mindset, they're"
going to ultimately want to do less.'
They want to engage less, and you're"
going to make less progress.
So this second piece is something'
that is quite important as we think about making progress'
in basically all of our discrimination and equal access'
issues.
All right.
So I'm going to talk hopefully not too long tonight."
But I'm going to use as a foundation"
a number of things that came out of an article'
that I coauthored with Arthur Acolin.'
He was a grad student of mine at University'
of Southern California.
We got asked by the Joint Center here'
to write a book chapter on affirmatively furthering'
fair housing.
And so I'm going to use that as a frame for a lot of what I'm"
going to talk about tonight.
Now, when we wrote the chapter, it'
was really before the election.
And so a lot has happened since then.'
And it's really allowed me to be able to step back"
and say, OK, there were a bunch of things in there'
that I thought we needed to pay attention'
to when we're thinking about what success would look like"
and whether we would achieve success'
in the context of affirmatively furthering fair housing.'
But now we're in a really different place."
And the pathways that might have seemed reasonable or even easy'
now seem quite challenging.
And so I want us to think moving forward'
about what does that mean for us and how should we move forward.'
All right.
So that's the title.
I think I was supposed to flip to that,'
but you had a nicer title than I did.'
So this is actually an interesting day today'
because I actually made the slides.'
And I'm kind of out of practice with that now."
I have staff that does that.
They do a great job.
So this is decidedly low-tech, I'm"
going to tell you right now, no movies, no nothing.'
There are going to be a lot of words and a couple tables,'
and we'll kind of move through that."
But what I wanted to do is just start with the close'
and really give an overview of how I see things right now.'
Clearly, I just talked about what the Fair Housing Act is,'
and it has these two components.
In terms of enforcement, what we've seen"
is enforcement has been consistently applied'
through the life of the Fair Housing Act.'
And some of that has happened by the government,'
and some of that has happened to the government'
by community groups and others who really challenge'
the government in saying that you're not taking enforcement"
seriously.
You need to do better.
I think that I was hopeful when I left HUD, actually,'
and after working on the Affirmatively Furthering'
program that we'd see a balance between the attention"
to enforcement and the attention to being affirmative.'
And I think that we may not be in that space.'
So enforcement over the next few years'
may be the key avenue and the key channel'
by which we're going to see progress in fair housing."
And that's something that is disappointing,"
but it may be where we are.
And then I feel like the reform that we'
did in terms of affirmatively furthering fair housing was'
actually quite promising.
It was intellectually creative.
It did a lot to try to build some buy-in'
and democratize the participation in the planning'
processes.
And people felt like they could understand it.'
We did a lot of work in the field talking to people,'
and governments were like, I get this, and this is possible.'
But now, I think that there are real questions'
as to how much of this we're actually"
going to see in place moving forward'
and how broadly should we expect to see the new regulations'
implemented.
Now, on balance, I'm trying to be optimistic."
So I know at these talks, if everyone'
left with a cloud, that wouldn't be so good."
So I really want people to leave thinking'
that there is a lot of positive that is possible'
and that we should expect to see in the next few years.'
And in part, it's because I think"
that one of the things that we worked towards very'
significantly is trying to broaden the notion of what'
fair housing is.
And with that broadening, I think'
it increases the likelihood that there'
are new allies in the fair housing pursuit'
and that the coalition to engage in this'
is actually going to be much more significant than it'
has been in the past.
And then there are some markers that we've"
created through the reform effort that are now well-known.'
They're understood.
And once they're out there, we have a new data tool."
Those sorts of things, they're not going to be pulled back."
And so that will create opportunities for others'
to move forward, even if the federal government is not'
out in front as the champion.
And so one of the punchlines I think for all of us'
in thinking about the era that we're currently in"
is that we may be back down to the grassroots.'
This may be an era where we have to turn to ourselves'
at the local level in community groups and in local governments'
to be the change and to make the change happen'
to advance the things that we value as a society.'
All right.
So that's the summary.
What I want to do is start with the foundation of all of this'
and why we still need a Fair Housing Act.'
Now, I assume if you came here, you already'
know a lot of the history.
So I'm not going to go through a lot of that"
to say that this is an issue.
But I did want to just talk about this'
in a more broader context by starting'
with the notion of economic mobility.'
So economic mobility is the idea that if you're"
born in a certain station in life,'
through hard work and effort and building yourself up,'
you can get to a different station.'
And this is something that I actually talk about a lot'
now as the president of the Atlanta Fed.'
I think it shocks people sometimes that I'm"
talking about economic mobility as an important aspect of what'
we do, but one of our mandates is maximizing employment.'
And the definition or defining what that means'
depends on how many people are actually employable.'
And so to the extent that people are not employable,'
that there are barriers that are preventing them from achieving'
wages and the human capital development that is necessary,'
then our benchmark for what full employment'
looks like or maximized employment'
is lower than it should be.
And so it's very important to me and to our institution"
that we reach out and engage and try'
to identify the barriers to maximize'
the number of employable people in the workplace.'
And we don't always have the tools at the Fed,"
but we do have a podium to stand on and yell from and with that,'
try to convince people that this is something that'
is important for all of us.
And it really does help everyone really'
believe in the American dream and believe it applies to them.'
And if we can get everyone to believe that,'
I think we wind up in a much more productive place'
as a country.
And so we talk about that all the time.'
And I think that fair housing is at its heart'
about economic mobility because Shaun often'
said housing determines so many things.'
Where your house is determines what school system'
you go to, what jobs are accessible,'
whether you can spend time out on the streets'
because they're safe or not safe."
And if your house is not in a place where those amenities are'
positive, then your ability to have real economic mobility'
is limited and constrained pretty significantly.'
And so segregation and discrimination,'
the things that the Fair Housing Act really tried to attack,'
were constraints to prevent African-Americans and people'
of other protected classes to be able to have housing in places'
where the foundational elements, the schools and the like,'
would give them true access to opportunity.'
So there's a large literature on the history of discrimination"
in this country.
If you saw the New York Times article or the editorial that'
came out on Sunday about institutionalized segregation,'
a lot of those policies were discriminatory policies'
explicitly, the racial covenants and the like.'
And the Mortgage Bankers Association--'
actually, this is a funny place I wouldn't have expected it,"
actually.
Dave Stevens doing some good things--'
has a nice history of the origins of the Fair Housing Act'
and how it was a 40- and 50-year struggle to get to that.'
And that was quite important.
I would say that I had the pleasure of overseeing'
the conduct of the decennial antidiscrimination study'
that HUD does as Assistant Secretary of Policy Development'
and Research--
still trying to quantify and understand'
the ways that discrimination happens in housing markets'
so that way, we can then start to craft responses.'
And so there's still a lot of work to be done there,"
but there has also been quite a lot of progress because'
of the work that a lot of researchers have done'
and a lot of brave citizens to stand up'
and say that these things are not right.'
Segregation is also a major impediment.'
And I'm not going to say a lot more on this,"
except to say that segregation in and of itself'
would not be a problem if all the amenities that I've"
been talking about were evenly distributed'
across the population because then the location of where'
you were would not matter.
But as we all know, that's not really real."
And so to the extent that those things are not'
evenly distributed across our space,'
then place actually matters in a significant way.'
And then segregation becomes really'
the equivalent of limiting economic mobility'
and limiting people's ability to pursue the American dream."
So when we think about fair housing, for me,'
it's not just the housing.
It's actually the context in which that housing operates"
and is located.
And so when we talk about fair housing--'
and this is what we did, and I think it was important--'
it's important to really spend a lot of time"
telling people and explaining why fair housing is important.'
And it's important for those economic mobility reasons."
And to the extent that we are not'
seeing that economic mobility, that'
imposes costs for the families themselves.'
But ultimately, it imposes costs for society.'
And in a world that is increasingly competitive,'
we should try to not have those costs, to the extent that we'
possibly can.
So everyone should leave here and start talking fair housing'
as an economic development issue and as a personal and community'
development issue because ultimately, that's what it is."
All right.
So with that commercial, so I like'
to give homework in my talk.
So that's part of your homework today, to go tell people,"
did you know fair housing's about economic development?"
So anyway, for the rest of the talk, what I'd like to do"
is really chronicle where we've been in terms of fair housing"
and then where we're likely to go."
And it's really going to focus on the two areas,"
affirmatively furthering fair housing and on the enforcement.'
Now, I'm going to start with affirmatively"
furthering fair housing.
I spent a lot of time on this.
And whenever I start writing on fair housing issues,'
I naturally gravitate to this because just'
I got pulled in so deeply that it's hard to not start there."
So when we think about affirmatively furthering,'
it was actually in the act.
And the first HUD Secretary, George Romney,'
tried to actually do it, and he tried'
to have communities be engaged in taking'
affirmative steps to reduce and eliminate segregation.'
The communities complained to the White House,'
and President Nixon told George to stop'
and ultimately forced him out of office.'
And so that was the first experience'
with affirmatively furthering fair housing.'
And so for years after that, HUD tiptoed in the space'
because they knew that there were political issues.'
And it really did introduce this challenge'
between the federal government and local government'
and who gets to decide what happens at that local level.'
Ultimately, there was a framework that was developed,'
and this should be the consolidated plan, not'
the comprehensive plan.
And they announced a framework around consolidated planning'
where, as part of the planning process,'
communities would have to do something called'
an "analysis of impediments."
And the Analysis of Impediments, which'
you may hear people talk about the AI,'
was really designed to incentivize jurisdictions'
to identify all the impediments to fair housing,'
like what are the things that are not working locally'
in the fair housing space, and then'
to start to craft some solutions around this.'
Now, it turns out that while this was nice in concept,'
it actually didn't work in practice."
And it didn't work for a couple of reasons."
First, HUD did not put together a lot of resources,'
did not devote a lot of resources'
to be a meaningful monitor to make sure that these AIs were'
done and then reviewed.
So there were lots of AIs that came to HUD,'
and HUD would take six, eight years to review them.'
And at that point, they were kind of moot, right?'
And so the GAO did an analysis of this process.'
And in the analysis, they took a survey of AIs'
that were on the shelves at HUD.
40% of them were older than five years.'
Now, the reg said you're supposed"
to do them every five years.
So 40% of them were older than that.'
11% were older than 10 years.
And it gives you a sense of how HUD was engaging in this.'
And once communities understood that, they were clearly going'
to do as little as necessary.
Just get a report up there, and then'
do whatever you want to do.
So there really wasn't a commitment"
to fair housing in an affirmative way.'
So we come to 2008.
There's an election.
President Obama is elected, and Shaun Donovan'
gets named and confirmed as the Secretary'
of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.'
And one of the things that he committed us to do'
was revisit this whole process, this affirmatively furthering'
function.
Now, it turned out to be quite difficult.'
And in part, it was because there'
was tension between the fair housing advocates'
and the community development advocates'
because the notion of fair housing'
was far narrower than how I've been talking about it."
And it caused the conversation to not'
go to constructive places.
So one of the things that we actually did that was, I think,'
quite innovative was to explicitly articulate'
fair housing in a broader way.
And then it took a couple years to get everyone'
into the same tent and understand that.'
But ultimately, it unleashed us to really'
have a unified approach to thinking about fair housing.'
So it worked.
All right.
So the goal of fair housing is equal access'
to economic opportunity.
That's another way to say maximizing the potential"
for economic mobility.
And that was actually quite innovative and revolutionary.'
I can't take credit for it.
That was written, and it was in long before I got there.'
But I was put in the place of trying'
to convince everyone that we were really going to do this.'
And so I can't say it was fun, but it was a learning"
experience in a lot of ways.
A second thing that emerged from this new framework'
was a focus on racially and ethnically concentrated areas'
of poverty.
And one of the things that we wanted'
to do as part of the rule was really'
try to give some guideposts as to what the most'
important problems were, that if you had these kind of problems,'
then these are things you should really pay attention'
to because in previous iterations,'
there was not really a lot of discussion about what the most'
pernicious issues were.
We pointed to this because there's a huge body of evidence"
which shows that those concentrations of poverty'
are a big problem in and of themselves.'
You think about the large public housing projects and the issues'
that emerged out of that.
And then you overlay race on top of that,'
and it's sort of a double doozy until those places become"
extremely costly, extremely isolated,'
and they impose extra costs on society.'
So we wanted to call that out and really start'
to socialize everyone on the ideas of how'
we are distributing our people has real implications for how'
well we're going to work.
And to the extent that we can get people to understand that,'
that's important.
A third innovation that we started'
to put in place through the new format'
was to try to have HUD be viewed as a partner'
at the local level.
Now, I talked about enforcement and affirmatively furthering.'
HUD got the enforcement down, and many local communities'
didn't like to talk to HUD because the only conversations"
that they ever had were in the context of you're"
not doing something right.
We're going to sanction you.
We're going to hold your money.
We're going to do all these sorts of things."
And so it was very difficult to get many jurisdictions'
to want to talk about fair housing at all'
because in their view, the only thing that fair housing did'
was bring them closer to a lawsuit,'
and they didn't want to do that.
So what we wanted to try to emphasize'
is that we have as a mandate to help you affirmatively further.'
So we want to be helpful as opposed to rapping people'
on their knuckles with a ruler.
The fourth innovation, which I think'
is perhaps going to be the most important of all of these,'
is the introduction of a new geospatial tool.'
So I'm expecting many of you have"
been to a planning commission meeting or a city council'
meeting where you've seen a business representative get up"
with a table of data and start dazzling people.'
And the community is at a loss.
They don't have the same amount of information,"
so the conversation is imbalanced.'
It's out of balance at decision making times."
So what we wanted to do and did quite effectively was say,'
OK, we're going to democratize data."
We're going make it easy for everybody"
to do the same analyses so that when someone gets up'
and they present their data, you can get up'
and present the data in a different way'
to make a different point and have the conversation really'
get to a place where we weren't debating about the data,"
and everyone had the same data.
So it was a level playing field so that there'
can be a shared and unified appreciation for what'
the challenges are in the local community.'
And then the fifth innovation was a new tool.'
So we replaced the AI with something'
we called an "assessment of fair housing."'
And the assessment of fair housing had a lot of elements.'
So I know there are a lot of words on this table, so don't"
read the words.
Just know that the fact that there are a lot of words'
should be instructive, in the sense that our initial goal was'
to try to make this as simple as possible for jurisdictions.'
We have six areas.
The summary is long.
The data analysis is long.
The assessment of the issues is long.'
So we wound up creating something'
that I think touched on all the elements that we think'
are important but in a way that ultimately I'
think was not as user-friendly as we might have hoped.'
What we were hoping for was that jurisdictions would actually'
do this on their own.
So in the AI world, what typically happened was'
your years came up.
You knew you had to do an AI.
You put out a contract.
You hired a consultant.
They did the whole thing.
They knew what the standard was, and they'
would come to the city council.
Maybe they'd read it.
Maybe they wouldn't read it.
But they knew they had to get it in, so they got it in.'
And we wanted to change that.
We wanted to have fair housing be something'
that was understood and embraced and wrestled'
with by all members of the community.'
So our goal was really to have a product that'
was easy to do because that ease would then mean that people'
would not be afraid.
They wouldn't be intimidated, and they could instead really"
go to the meetings and talk to people about things'
that are really important.
All right.
So that was the framework.
That was sort of the innovation.
Now, in our chapter, we talked about what'
are the risks for this working.
And if this framework is going to work, what will we'
need to see to have this work?
And we identified eight areas that would be important.'
Now, I want to talk through the eight,'
and then I'll talk about how we're doing"
in each of these categories.
So the first is that HUD must have sufficient capacity.'
So in order to do this, this is actually a change in approach.'
We wanted to make HUD accountable to itself'
and to jurisdictions.
So that would mean that when the AFHs came in,'
they actually had to be read and reviewed.'
And a decision needed to be made in a fixed amount of time'
so this wasn't hanging out there over the head"
of a jurisdiction.
There needed to be opportunities for jurisdictions'
to ask questions and to talk with people'
and to bounce ideas off of them and to understand what'
the department was thinking.
And this was just going to change really'
in a fundamental way the allocation of resources'
inside HUD.
And so HUD needed to make sure it'
had the capacity to deliver on all the demands'
that we were putting on it.
The second is that HUD had to help increase local capacity.'
So in many local governments, they'
don't have a lot of resources.
They're not in a position to take on a new responsibility."
And if we're really serious about having them do it,"
we need to put resources in place to make it easy for them.'
And so HUD needed to do that by either doing it themselves,'
developing courses, providing guidance, or hiring'
intermediaries to provide those services.'
The third is the principle of local primacy'
must be honored and respected.
The one thing that jurisdictions worried about more'
than anything else in this framework'
was that the federal government was'
going to tell them what to do, that no matter'
what they thought was a good idea,'
there was going to be some bureaucrat that'
was going to come to town and say, oh no,'
this is the right answer.
And there would be no notion that their experience'
and their time and their knowledge of their community'
would be able to credibly be brought to bear.'
And so we told our staff repeatedly, if there is a plan'
and it's credible and we're looking to argue about"
whether it's credible or not, we're going with the plan"
because we need to have locals believe that they'
get to use their brains to figure out'
what a good approach and good strategy is.'
And if there's participation at the community level in the way"
that we expect, it should be a collective decision.'
This won't be two people in a room making a decision."
So we should honor that collective very significantly.'
The third is that if we're going to have"
the principle of local primacy, then the locals'
have got to really take it seriously and do it well.'
They've got to send their staff to meetings."
They've got to have meetings with communities."
They've got to produce the data and wrestle with it"
and work and really have a good faith effort.'
And I will tell you that inside of the building'
when I was at HUD, this was one that HUD people had'
a big problem with.
They did not actually believe that most jurisdictions would'
put a good faith effort together.'
The way I describe is there are really'
three types of jurisdictions notionally.'
There are the ones who are the super achievers.'
They want to do everything great.'
So they're going to take this, and they're"
going to do it excellently.
Then there are going to be the folks that'
aren't going to do this under any circumstances."
They don't believe in this, and they're going to say,"
I'm not going to advance for housing because I'm against it."
And then there's everyone else, the people"
in the middle who they don't feel that strongly about it."
But they're not going to go right out in front of it."
And the debate and what we all have to ask ourselves'
is, what's the distribution of cities across those three"
categories?
Is it that most are in the bad category?'
Is it most are in the good category?'
Is it mostly in the middle?
And your prior about what the distribution of communities is'
has a real implication for how you'
want to design the regulation.
If you think everyone's a bad actor,"
then you want to be much more prescriptive.'
You want to be much more in an enforcement space'
to make people do things.
But if you think everyone is in the good side,'
then you just need to be subjective and throw up'
some ideas, and they'll get it done."
And so we had a lot of debate about this.'
And people were colored from their experiences'
in enforcement activities, in fair housing activities,'
and just general conversation, the conferences,'
about what that answer was.
And that issue became a huge barrier for us'
in building consensus institutionally.'
The fifth area is attention has to be regional,'
and we've got to go beyond housing."
So I've talked a lot about the go beyond housing already."
The regional is important because ultimately, economies'
don't respect jurisdictional boundaries."
And all of our metro areas are economic engines,'
fundamentally.
They produce things, and we come together to do those things.'
And so if you think at a very jurisdictional level, the job'
location or the school that you want to access or the training'
program, if it's not in your jurisdiction,"
then it's outside of your purview."
So only by thinking regionally, by thinking collectively'
about where are all of our amenities,'
can we get a plan that's likely to be positive in all"
those dimensions.
And so the regional aspect was actually quite important.'
The data must be leveraged to give everyone a voice.'
So we really wanted to make sure that this data tool got'
in the hands of regular people and got'
in the hands of newspaper reporters and people'
outside of the usual process to try to say,'
OK, you have as much information as everybody else.'
You should not be intimidated to go to these meetings.'
You should not be intimidated to have an opinion.'
And if you do that, then the community will be'
your community as well as everybody else's."
That's a very important message that I"
don't think many had heard very often,"
and we hadn't really given them tools"
to have a hope of really believing that.'
The next to last one's foundations and nonprofits."
They've got to monitor and be partners,"
be partners with the communities but also be partners with HUD.'
And in many instances, particularly'
in the nonprofit space, they were adversaries.'
They spent most of their time arguing and fighting'
with each other to try to get a few extra resources here'
and there, and those are not constructive contexts'
to be doing long-term planning.
You all have had arguments with people,'
and you don't want to sit down and then"
be nice to them an hour later--
at least, me, an hour.
It takes me a little longer than an hour.'
And so if you've had years of bad experiences"
or negative, combative experiences,'
the idea that all of a sudden, you're"
all going to get together has got'
to be something that has got to be purposeful'
because it's not just going to happen on its own."
So we needed to have everyone position themselves'
as partners.
And then the last one is that the political risk must not'
be fatal.
At the time we wrote this, there were a number'
of proposals in the Congress to really gut'
the whole notion of the affirmative furthering'
regulation and, as a consequence,'
really make it impossible to do the things that we had'
worked to try to put in place.
So those were the eight things that we called out'
as the preconditions for success, if you will.'
And so the question naturally is, where are we today?'
And so I have my view, and I've put those here."
So the first is I talked about HUD having sufficient capacity.'
HUD didn't add any capacity.
And in fact, HUD went the other way'
and said, because we didn't add any capacity,"
we're going to waive everybody.
So no one actually has to do the AFH.'
They can go back to the AI framework if they want.'
So we didn't do very well here.
In terms of the second, increasing local capacity,'
I think there has been progress here.'
In the appropriations for the department,'
HUD set aside a fair amount of money for third parties--'
Enterprise Community Partners, associates, and others--'
to be available to provide technical assistance'
and training for local governments.'
And some have actually taken advantage of it.'
And so I think there's progress here,"
and that knowledge that that exists in the space'
will not go away.
That expertise will be there.
And so there's an opportunity for good things"
to happen there.
In terms of principle of local primacy,'
there's been progress here, as well."
I have to say I'm pleased to be able to say this."
Many locals actually stepped up with interesting ideas that'
may not have initially been viewed'
as in the purview of fair housing, really,'
and HUD let them go through, which was good.'
So example is Los Angeles.
Part of the AFH planning process resulted'
in a new understanding between the police and the transgender'
community and how they interact.
There was creativity in terms of the LA Unified School District'
and their use of vacant land near high-performing schools.'
These are all things that were not really being'
suggested in an old framework.
So there was a lot of promise that'
emerged out of the experience.
The locals must make a good faith effort.'
I think here, there's been some progress."
It's not as great as I would have hoped,"
in part, I think, because of HUD's issues."
So many of the communities would ask'
HUD for technical assistance and HUD was actually'
quite slow in making those resources available, such'
that by the time the resources came,'
the clock had ticked a lot.
And so we were just in a rush to get something in,'
which means that the good faith effort that we had conceived of'
is really going to be cut short pretty considerably.'
But I think that that can be remedied.'
In terms of the attention being regional, extending'
beyond housing, we saw a number of jurisdictions'
in the early rounds really embrace the regional notion.'
From Chicago to Denver to New York City, all of these places'
were places that really tried to think'
about this in a regional way.
And I think they were getting it in a pretty significant way.'
Very much a significant amount of progress'
in terms of data leveraging--
there is quite a lot of infrastructure'
that was put in place, and people'
made themselves use of it.
One of the things that was learned through some'
of the early rounds is that for people'
who are not used to working with data, who haven't had"
the opportunity to wrestle with things and play around,'
they need space before the meetings just'
to figure out what to do.
So creating opportunities-- and this is a role for foundations,'
I think, to provide--
is some safe time and space where they just'
come, wrestle with the data, and try to figure out'
what it means for themselves.
And so if they can do that, when the meeting happens'
at the community level, they're in a position"
to be articulate about exactly what they think.'
And it should give more confidence'
that that voice will be taken seriously,'
and I think that's something that we should hope for."
And then in terms of the foundations and nonprofits'
being monitors and partners, I think'
there's been a fair amount of progress here."
And for me, I talked with some folks who monitored the process'
in a number of these cities.
And what they said was they were struck'
by how many nonprofits came to the table'
believing they understood what it meant to try'
to run a city department.
And then they got in the room and started'
making their demands, and the cities told them, well, we only'
have a third of the money that you think we have.'
And those constraints then changed the calculus around'
what's possible, how do we do prioritization,"
how do we engage long-run, and I think it brought the groups'
closer together because in many instances, I got a sense that--'
actually, I experienced this.
Nonprofits would talk to me and say,'
you're just being difficult to be difficult. I was like,"
no, we're being difficult because this is hard."
We don't have a lot of resources to do these things."
And so we need to be extra creative.'
There are many things that seem like good ideas'
that we don't have the resources to do."
And by making it real, I think there'
was tremendous value in that.
And then the political risk, it remains.'
It probably remains for different reasons,'
but there are some real challenges'
to think about in terms of whether'
the political environment that we're in"
is going to be conducive to a real embrace of affirmatively'
furthering fair housing, of being positive in fair housing'
to try to create equal access to opportunity and to communities.'
All right.
So that's where we are.
Now, I've already said I'm pretty"
optimistic that many of the elements that we've"
put in place can be positive.
I wanted to say a few words on enforcement,'
and then I'll wrap up.
So enforcement has always been a prominent aspect of the act,'
and it was trying to make progress where'
fair housing is concerned.
Many instances, it was HUD officials'
doing the enforcement.
And in many other circumstances, it'
was communities and nonprofits suing'
HUD to do the enforcement.
And at one point, when we came in,'
there were a ton of outstanding lawsuits'
that had not been resolved.
And with Shaun's leadership, we resolved all of them."
I think by the time we were done, I got to do one.'
Was mine the last one?
I think it was close to the end.
So I got a lot of gray hair.
About a third of it was from that working on that project,'
but it was because in many instances,'
these issues are challenging the way'
that the HUD programs operate.
HUD is a conduit for resources, and then the decisions'
get made somewhere else.
And so in that kind of distributed context,'
there's a real question about who is accountable"
and who should be accountable.
And there's a lot of wrestling that happens"
within the government about that,'
within the courts about that, and among communities.'
And many of the resolution issues'
are really centered on this question of accountability.'
Most recently, there was the disparate impact ruling'
that the Supreme Court made in 2015.'
This was something that had been I'
think long dreaded by the fair housing community'
and an expectation that this would not'
be viewed as positive or possible or even legal.'
But the Supreme Court found something quite different,'
which was interesting.
I think that it will be useful moving forward'
in affecting the types of things that will receive scrutiny'
from a practice perspective and hopefully will'
eliminate a number of the barriers that currently exist.'
Now, the last thing I wanted to say'
is I don't expect that we're going"
to see a lot of creativity on the affirming side,'
on the positive side, on the partnership side, given'
the steps that we've seen in the Department of Housing"
and Urban Development in the last year or so.'
So it may be the case that moving forward,'
this is going to be where a lot of the action is.'
And as I said, this does not make me happy,'
in the sense that I'd rather have people"
do the things because they want to do them,'
because they understand the value in doing them, rather'
than dragging them and forcing them to do things because that'
creates a relationship that is less likely to be positive'
and embracing over the longer run.'
So if we can try to return to some level of balance,'
I think we will be in a better place.'
All right.
So to wrap up, this is the Fair Housing Act.'
It's a landmark piece of legislation."
Tomorrow, it becomes 50 years old.'
And it really did create a sea change'
in terms of how we should think about housing markets'
and what works for people and what'
we should expect people to experience as they'
engage in housing markets.
It has not solved all the problems.'
We still have a fair number of problems.'
But it did create a framework that'
allowed us to start to attack them'
and to try to make progress and make points that reduce'
the number of people who are constrained'
in their pursuit of the American dream for housing reasons.'
There are maybe other issues, but in the housing space,'
we definitely have made progress.'
I'm actually quite optimistic moving forward,"
and I would say that in today's world,"
I think there are many people who'
understand that economic mobility is at risk.'
So I spend a lot of time flying around the country talking'
to regular people, business people, community folks.'
And all of them see the tremendous change'
that's happening in the economy and understand"
that the expectations about where they're going to be"
and where their children are going to be'
are quite different than they were 20 or 30 years ago.'
And so this notion that we should'
be trying to do all the things that we'
can to maximize the likelihood of having every person have'
access to economic mobility is something that I'm finding"
resonates with people.
And so this may be a time to really start'
to talk about the notion that fair housing is'
just part and parcel of all the things you're thinking about."
And it can be part of the solution'
as we move forward to make sure that the next generation'
and the generation after that are living in an America that'
really does work and provides access to the American dream.'
So I will stop there.
And I guess there's time for question,"
so I'm happy to do that.
Thank you.
[applause]
Just if you have a question, please identify yourself.'
And as David Luberoff is want to say,'
"A question does end in a question mark."'
But raise your hand.
We have microphones on the sides.'
Was a question over there?
Yeah.
Right behind you.
Yeah.
Bill Carlson-- retired.
I'm interested in how Dodd-Frank has affected the availability"
of funding for housing.
So that's a complicated question."
So this is a very complicated question,'
so bear with me because there's a little history"
I have to do to get there.
So everyone knows we had a housing crisis in the 2000s,'
right?
And that housing crisis had as its origins a lot'
of challenges in the flows of capital and credit,'
such that people were able to get access'
to a whole lot more capital in much more risky contexts'
than they probably should have been.'
Dodd-Frank was a response to that and to say,'
we're going to get rid of all of the ability for the Wild West"
to prevail in an environment where'
there was no accountability for long-run performance'
of the mortgage.
And so on one level, Dodd-Frank was'
designed to limit the availability of credit, to say,'
if you're going to get credit, you have to be credit-worthy,"
you have to have an ability to pay,'
and you need to understand the risks associated'
with that mortgage product.
And so while it has limited access to capital on one level,'
I think as a proportion of the capital that's flowing,"
it's increased the amount of capital"
that's going to sustainable mortgages"
and to sustainable homeownership.'
So we're not seeing the same sort of chaos"
that we were seeing before.
So it depends on your definition of what access is.'
For me, our administration was the first presidential'
administration I think in 70 years'
to not say homeownership was a goal.'
But rather, sustainable housing was a goal.'
Our people need to be housed stably'
in a way that makes sense, and I think Dodd-Frank'
was constructive in that way.
Hi.
I'm Aaliyah Batia.
I'm a native Atlanta resident and a master in public policy"
student.
My question is, for those of us who work in additional related'
areas-- like education, workforce development,'
politics, organizing--
what are the things that we can do'
to be allies in those spaces for fair housing?'
So a very good question, and I'm loving Atlanta."
So I'll bring a hello back home for you."
A lot of things-- so one is just find out'
who your housing people are.
I've been amazed at when I go to a city"
and I'm sitting with housing people, I'm like,"
do you know the transportation people?'
Do you know what building they're in?"
Just basic relationships don't exist."
And you can't find creative solutions"
if you actually don't talk to the other people"
that you need to be creative with.'
So that's the first thing.
Just find out who they are.
Talk to them.
Take them to coffee or whatever.
A second is to really be mindful of where assets are located.'
So to the extent that you're in education,"
where are your flagship schools?
Where are your training programs?'
Do you have after-school stuff, and are they'
close to the places of need in your community?'
And try to make sure that you understand'
the flows that go together.
And then a third thing is talk to people in your community'
and really try to understand the things that they'
see as barriers and understand how people actually'
live in the community on a day to day basis'
because a lot of times, I'll have"
an idea of what a problem is.
But I can be totally wrong because I'
don't have the same appreciation as people"
who are trying to live with challenges'
that are unfamiliar to me.
So talk to people, and that could give you directions'
on who else you need to know.
Is it the housing people?
Is it the health people?
Is it the transportation people?
And the other thing, the fourth thing--'
I keep adding things now--
is figure out who actually has money because they're the folks"
you want to be friends with.
And if you can do that and convince them'
that they have an interest in working with you to advance'
things, then you now have a partner with resources'
that can help you craft things.
Sometimes, it's foundations, but you can look at hospitals."
You can look at the transportation money'
because there's a lot of transportation money."
So thinking about who your allies should be'
is something that's quite important."
Yeah.
Identify yourself, please.
Yeah.
I'm George McCarthy from the Lincoln Institute"
of Land Policy.
So Raphael, the way you set this up'
was that fair housing was a response to a systemic problem'
in the housing market.
The market actually wasn't working."
And the problem with the kind of enforcement--'
we're doing litigation as enforcement--"
is that litigation in piecemeal fashion'
doesn't lead to a systemic response to a systemic problem."
And I'm wondering why is it the way we do litigation"
doesn't lead to some signature precedent-setting case that"
then fuels a movement, something like Brown versus Board'
or something--
I don't know-- some major case that says,"
now we empower everybody to go out and make'
some kind of meaningful challenge'
that then leads to a systemic response?'
So that's a good question.
I think this is complicated.
And it has to do with the will to enforce.'
So you guys should read the MBA thing.'
It was actually quite interesting,'
as they chronicle the evolution of the antidiscrimination laws'
in housing.
The first antidiscrimination law in housing'
was passed in the '40s, but the will to enforce"
wasn't there to make it clear that every person needed"
to do this.
If you're a landlord, you need to do this."
And so people just didn't do it, and there was no will."
And the difference-- now, this is actually quite interesting'
because I was listening to a podcast on desegregation'
during the Civil Rights Act.
And the guy who was talking, he was'
one of the people who just would go'
sit in a store that was segregated'
and sit and want to get served.
And they wouldn't serve him.
And then the police would come, and they'd walk him out."
And then when the Civil Rights Act passed,'
they came right back to the same store, sat down,'
and they served them.
And it was actually quite interesting.'
And so there was a psychology around this.'
They actually talked to the store owner.'
I think this was maybe an NPR thing.'
I don't know if anyone has heard this."
And the store owner said, we think'
discrimination's horrible.
The store owner said this.
But we would have kept discriminating because that's"
just what we did, and we didn't want"
people to tell us what to do.
And so it is very complicated, and it's"
embedded in psychology and sociology and tribalism.'
And it requires, I think, a deep sustained engagement'
and enough social profile.
So we don't have in housing the equivalent of Selma."
We don't have that visual thing that"
links every person in the room and says,'
oh, this is really bad.
And maybe until we get that--
but I'm hopeful we don't have to get that."
This is why the affirmatively furthering stuff is stuff'
that I'm super hopeful about.
For those of you who are doing research,'
any research you can do to show that diverse places do better--'
they're more resilient, and they grow faster,"
all those sorts of things--
that is incredibly powerful.
It'd be incredibly helpful.
Now, we may not report your paper directly.'
We may fold it into a narrative.
But that's the type of information"
that we need to get so people understand that by doing this,'
their interests are advanced.
And if that becomes the general mindset,'
I think we can get to a more positive place.'
But it's a very hard issue.
Hi there.
My name is John Griffith.
I most recently was at Enterprise Community Partners.'
It's good to see you.
I know who you are, yes.
I'm now at the Kennedy School.
So you rightly said that the big issue in fair housing'
is connecting folks to areas with good schools'
and other opportunities.
And there's two sides to that, obviously."
There's getting people to the neighborhoods that already have"
that, and then there's making the investments"
into the neighborhoods that don't have that"
and making sure that they're not abandoned."
I'm wondering whether, either in your time at the Fed"
or in your time earlier, whether you've"
seen examples of cities that are doing the latter well'
and whether you see any opportunities on the horizon,'
either through opportunity zones or other kind'
of federal issues, to help make sure'
that we're not abandoning neighborhoods"
of concentrated poverty that have'
a deep history of disinvestment.
So it's a very good question, and I'll answer it"
with a story to start.
So I was doing this AFFH work.
That's what we call the affirmative furthering."
And we started going around to cities.'
I would do little road tours, the roadshows'
to see if cities were OK with what we were proposing.'
And at a couple of the cities, they were medium-sized.'
It wasn't New York or Chicago.
They said, we don't actually really like to do this,"
but we have no idea what success looks like.'
Can you tell us or show us a city that actually does it?'
And I didn't have a city on my mind at the time,"
so I was like, no, I'll get back to you."
And then I started going around and talking to advocates'
and community folks.
And no one had that canon of places that was the success.'
And it was kind of shocking.
And to me, it made me say, well, it's kind of almost not fair"
that we're asking people to do things that are under-resourced"
and we're not given them any hints"
as to what a successful strategy might look like.'
So we actually started a project when I left to try to do this.'
Now, we picked three cities, Portland, Seattle,'
and San Diego.
And we are now going through and looking'
at a number of the projects and efforts that'
have happened in those places to see if any of them'
actually should make the list.
Our report is due in May, so we should have some answers then.'
But it is actually an incredibly important question that'
should be on all of our minds.
Where is that success because it's not something that's"
in the collective psyche.
So without that, we've got a bunch of people"
who are walking in the dark.
They're trying to feel around and figure out things,"
and we need to do better to help that succeed.'
In terms of policy, we'll see how it plays out."
Things like opportunity zones, we've tried those in the past."
They have not been transformative'
in almost all instances.
So I'm happy to be optimistic, but I"
think we need to also be very thoughtful about,'
are we seeing success anywhere?
And if so, how many people are we telling about'
it to get that word out because that's very sorely needed."
Roger Herzog-- so you're at the Federal Reserve."
Our Fed here in Boston did a very powerful report'
within the last couple years that'
demonstrated the very severe income inequality and wealth'
inequality in our region.
So just connecting your work at the Fed'
with the issue of fair housing, your advice to this young woman'
was find someone with resources and get to know them.'
Do you see a role for the Federal Reserve System'
in trying to address our fair housing challenges?'
So absolutely.
And when I talk to people, one thing'
that is a continuous takeaway for me'
is that nobody actually knows what the Fed actually does.'
They have no idea what we do.
So they know something about interest rates,'
but that's kind of as far as it goes."
We actually have a staff in every Reserve Bank'
and at the board in DC that works on community'
common development.
And their job is actually to go out and work with communities'
to make them places that work.
We have the head of the community development group'
here from Boston, Prabal Chakrabarti.'
It's good to see you.
And he's a great host.
If you ever get a chance to go over there,'
you should go sit with his team.
But we're working on this to try to help communities figure out"
what they need to be successful for their residents'
and then connect them to the extent'
possible with experts and resources and the like'
to help execute that.
So here, we have a Working Cities Initiative'
that's trying to work with some of the older cities"
that have had heydays in the past,'
but they're not heydays now.
And in my district, we are doing the same thing.'
We're trying to find out who has the energy and the desire"
to go out and make a difference.
And then what things don't you have?"
And we'll get you in touch with as many of those things."
If we have them in-house, I'll send some folks"
to go deal with that.
If not, we'll find who can.
Another thing we've actually been working on"
is trying to figure out how to get philanthropy'
to engage more deeply in sort of nontraditional, suspect'
places, which we're in the sixth district."
There's deep need in the South.
But if you look at the philanthropic penetration,'
particularly from national organizations,'
it's limited relative to the need."
And so we're trying to figure out what kind of structure we"
can put in place and what kind of relationships we can create'
to try to turn that around because we believe--'
and I actually believe this is true--'
we need to make sure that the resources that'
are interested in being deployed in these spaces'
get deployed to greatest effect.
And in some instances, that's capacity-building"
and leadership.
In other instances, it's to help seed some entrepreneurship,"
if necessary.
In others, it's to put in people who"
can help with school programs or to help revamp or revise'
a curriculum.
We're agnostic as to what we're willing to help facilitate,"
but we're there to do it.
So you and everyone in this room and everyone who's listening,"
you should feel free to ask the Fed things.'
Ask us to help.
And I'm pretty confident we'll be there, and we'll do it."
So Raphael, help us to get it.
I think you got to take that one.'
[laughter]
And I'm sorry, Chris.
Sorry, Chris, but I'm going to not follow instructions here,"
and I'm going to end my first sentence without a question"
mark.
Then I'm going to have a question."
But I just want to say in front of everybody here, Raphael,'
congratulations for the incredible work you'
did on this at HUD.
For those who don't understand, this"
wasn't going to get done until Raphael got involved."
The Assistant Secretary for Policy Development and Research'
doesn't do fair housing, but Raphael did."
And I think the commitment you hear in everything'
he's talked about to what I would describe"
as a truly democratic process of getting everyone'
around the table, listening to them,'
and getting them to a place none of them'
thought they could get to, that's what Raphael did."
And that's why we have, at least tenuously,"
an affirmatively furthering fair housing regulation.'
So thank you for doing that.
Thank you.
[applause]
I also want to go back to something'
you said relatively quickly.
And I think you rightly said it was a big change,'
but I think it's important enough"
that it's worth going back to.
And I want to ask you about that.'
This shift from just thinking about fair housing as'
about whether blacks and whites or other protected classes'
are living together to not only focusing on areas'
racially but also economically concentrated,'
particularly areas of poverty, was one piece of it.'
But we also did a lot of thinking'
about measuring fair housing in terms of access to opportunity'
very literally.
What's the quality of the schools in your neighborhood?"
What's the quality of the health care"
or the jobs or other things?
And that was a pretty revolutionary thing'
to do, as well.
You had a pretty good scorecard on the risks,'
but I'd love to hear your scorecard"
on whether that view of fair housing as something'
different than the way people saw it before is actually'
taking hold or not among communities but also'
among fair housing advocates and a range of others.'
Yeah.
Well, first of all, I can only do'
what I did because he gave me the cover to do it.'
And these sort of big things don't happen without leadership"
that's really committed to it.
So you were a force that was there to really make sure'
that when people acted up, which was pretty'
much every day, that I could say, well,'
we're going to do this, anyway.
So you can either choose to be here,'
or you can choose to watch us from outside the room.'
But we're moving forward.
And they always chose to participate'
because this is important.
And one thing I would say is--
and this is what I tried to get our team to really understand--'
no one works at HUD--
well, this is probably too strong.'
But most people don't work at HUD"
if they don't care passionately about the mission."
Everyone in the room, we're here because we actually"
believe that these communities should really'
work for everybody and that there's"
a role for the federal government to play'
to help facilitate that.
And we may have different ideas about what'
the most important barrier is or what'
the most important challenges or what a strategy is,'
but if we lose sight of the fact that we're all here"
trying to get to the same place, things can break down pretty'
considerably.
And where we were, they had broken down'
pretty bad to where people just went to the corners'
and just started yelling at each other.'
I think that we've actually made a lot of progress"
on this, in the sense that for a good eight years,'
the community, whether it be community development'
community or the fair housing people,'
heard the same thing, that you guys are'
pointing in the same direction.
You guys should be working together.'
You guys should be engaged to try'
to find solutions that advance.
We're not in an either/or world.
We're in a both/and.
Everything is going to be necessary.'
And I do think that there's been a lot of progress there."
I have concerns that under more stress,'
there's a predisposition to revert back to where we were."
And we've got to fight that because I"
think we're stronger collectively as a community"
in making progress in something that's"
really important to our societies if we're together"
and if our energies are all mutually supportive.'
And so this job doesn't give me an opportunity"
to really talk to a lot of folks like that anymore.'
But I haven't heard the passing explosion that I"
used to hear six years ago.
Did you hear what happened in Minneapolis?'
Did you hear what happened in New Orleans?'
Did you hear what happened in Phoenix?'
I think that's happening far less,"
and those explosions were among the allies.'
These are the people who like each other.'
And so if we're not hearing that,"
I think that's a sign that we've made progress."
And now, it's just a question of figuring out"
how are we going to take this progress'
and turn it into something real and make sure that we continue'
to see progress in as many communities as we possibly can.'
I would say start with the willing ones.'
And the ones who don't want to do it at all,"
that's enforcement space.
We should feel free to use our enforcement in those areas,'
but let's bring along as many people"
as want to and really start to see positive change.'
[inaudible]
Hi.
I don't like following Shaun Donovan."
I'm sorry.
Anyway, sorry.
Excuse me.
I'm Megan Sandel from Boston Medical Center."
So my question is about the Community Reinvestment Act and'
whether or not there are ways in which to push that envelope'
and perhaps bring in new sectors,'
like hospitals and health care, to invest'
and whether or not you would ever'
envision ways in which Community Reinvestment Act'
regulations could encourage that collaboration and alignment'
and be able to bring new actors and new capital'
into this space.
So CRA is an important tool.
Everyone knows what CRA is?
I just want to make sure.
There's a proposed revision to CRA--"
well, a framework for revision of the CRA that has been just'
issued last week by the Treasury Department.'
I would encourage everyone to read it'
because the idea of the CRA was initially'
predicated in a world where banking institutions,'
they operate out of a branch network.'
And they don't really do that anymore."
How many people here have been in a branch'
in the last six months?
[laughter]
Really?
Even the 10% is surprising.
And so in a world where branches have become far less'
significant, having the requirements'
to engage with community based on that just seems misplaced.'
So we need to be rethinking what it means for a bank'
to have a community and how should'
they think about serving the broad range of that community.'
The other thing I would say is just'
like I think fair housing is a broader economic development,'
the CRA is, as well.
And so I think we need to be creative in our thinking'
about what kind of activities are actually advancing'
functional communities that provide real opportunities'
for their residents.
And it's my sense that the set of activities"
that has counted to date is narrower'
than the set of activities that should count.'
And now, hospitals are a tremendous engine,'
a potential for employment and for economic development'
and as an anchor for communities.'
We should think about ways that we can help hospitals be'
a part of the solution on this.
And so I'm open.
These issues and these processes can be difficult'
and can trigger a fair amount of wrestling.'
But I think that this is another one where'
I think we should try to be thoughtful'
about those situations where we're all"
pointing the same direction.
And it's really just about the details"
as opposed to those issues where we may not'
be pointing the same direction.
Then we have to have a different kind of conversation.'
But I talked to the Treasury folks'
as they were putting this together,'
and the fundamental things about the world has changed,'
so the regulation should change.
I think that's right.
And so now with all these rates, the devil's in the detail."
But I think we all should try to work together and be'
a voice of how much of this needs'
to be included to really show a lot of progress.'
Unfortunately, I think we're going to have to call it there."
Raphael, I want to thank you in part'
for making sure you brought to us a note of optimism.'
Many of you have heard me say this before.'
We\'re called the "Joint Center for Gloom and Doom"'
because what we do is call attention to the problems'
that we face and many of which have been intractable.'
And I think this certainly is one'
that would be up there in terms of intractable problems,'
but I think there is reason for optimism.'
And I think one of the reasons for optimism'
is that when we make progress, there may be some retreat,'
but a lot of that ground is held.'
And I think that this affirmatively furthering'
fair housing is progress.
And while we're maybe in a little retreat now,"
there's a basis there for, I think,"
a process that's really valuable."
And I think Mac talked about enforcement.'
I think the piece of this that really strikes'
me is the community engagement.
Now, you said this is that we're going to have change,"
it can't necessarily just be forced in from outside."
It's got to come from within.
And I do think there's reason to think that there is motivation."
People do want to further these issues of integration.'
And I think having the data, the analysis, and the process--'
and CRA is a good lesson here because I'
think the reason why CRA has been effective'
is because of that community engagement.'
We have to have data and information.'
That could be the sunlight you need,'
but that community engagement is important.'
So that's just my little--
I guess I didn't end in a question, either."
But you're the host.
You don't have to.
Before you say goodbye to everyone,'
do follow me on Twitter.
So I'm trying to get my--
I'm concerning a competition among all the bank"
presidents about who has the most followers.'
I'm behind right now.
So get on there because we're doing some great things."
And I've really enjoyed this, so thank you all for coming out."
[applause]
The last thing I want to say is when'
I have people like Raphael standing up here,'
I have to remind myself that he's the president of a Federal"
Reserve Bank, in part because you're knowledgeable,"
you're thoughtful, and you're very"
broad-ranging in terms of what you know'
and what you bring to this.
I had the same feeling with Shaun Donovan'
was HUD Secretary.
Really, I'm just so grateful to have you"
in this position of really significant power'
and influence, given what you bring to it.'
So thank you for your public service,'
and thank you for being with us here tonight.'
Thank you.
[applause]
