Hi, everyone.
My name is Nicholas de Monchaux.
I have been an MIT faculty member for all of eight weeks.'
I'm taking over as head of the architecture department"
here a little over two months from now.'
This moment gives me an opportunity'
to introduce myself to you, but also'
to credit everyone who has worked so hard on this,'
our first virtual lecture of the spring 2020 semester,'
and one more small piece of the Herculean effort'
that's taken our students, our staff, and our faculty"
to rapidly and unexpectedly change'
everything about what we do in order to keep doing what we do.'
Even though we all might be in our homes, none of us'
are in our usual space.
Current students are struggling with moving'
their massive commitments online into'
claustrophobic bedrooms and claustrophobic virtual rooms.'
Our faculty and staff is struggling'
to keep MIT's vast virtual architecture afloat,"
while our studios lie empty, our gyms and shared spaces,'
like the ice rink, are converted into medical wards,'
and our shops and production facilities in architecture,'
as well as all over the institute,'
are converted to support Boston area hospitals by making'
PPE and other clinical tools.
Earlier today I gave a presentation'
to MIT's leadership and heads of department"
about how our studio teaching is adapting to the current crisis.'
Students and faculty are making amazing efforts,'
but some of the most essential ingenuity,'
like our new architecture student-run radio station,'
WAWD, is a response to the biggest loss we have right now,'
and one that is essential to the culture of studios,'
and to the culture of our cities as well.'
This is not just doing what we need to do,'
but the part of studios and cities'
which involves doing what we didn't think we need to do,"
but that turns out to be essential.'
It's this part of student life, the serendipitous,"
the unexpected, the seemingly fri--'
excuse me-- frivolous thing that turns out'
to be both marvelous and essential'
that the current moment has with so many other things'
taken away from us.
This is why along with thanking those contributing'
to the logistics of this event, Amanda Moore, Kevin'
Tierney, our current head, Andrew Scott,'
and of course, our speakers, I would like'
to thank most of all of you.
Precisely because you don't have to be here,"
but you're here anyway.
You are claiming for all of us the necessity of the unexpected'
and the unnecessary in education and everyday life both.'
To our alumni here tonight and to our visitors'
from other schools and institutions,'
I'd like particularly to welcome you,"
to thank you for helping us widen'
the circle of serendipity, and to use it to bring you either'
back to MIT, or to visit MIT for the first time.'
The unexpected and intense nature'
of my first two months at MIT have challenged me,'
even as everyone else is being challenged all around us.'
But I'm particularly grateful for the ways"
that these last eight weeks have shown me'
that MIT Architecture is in us, a community far'
more than a set of spaces.
It's a place that can exist in multiple ways"
and exists here tonight thanks to you.'
So this is a time to embrace things,'
like an architecture lecture that can seem normal,'
and that can help us reclaim our professional'
and intellectual identity amidst so much uncertainty.'
But it's not a time to pretend that things are normal."
This is why I'm particularly glad to share"
with you that tonight's lecturers"
Leslie and Sasa, former MIT students both,'
are donating their honorarium from tonight's lecture"
to a fund established by our dean's office for students"
in need.
I would invite any of you out there with any interest in this'
to contact the dean's office with any questions"
about this fund or about how all our efforts can'
support our own and other communities in need'
at this time.
Now to the business of tonight, which'
is introducing our special and most welcome guests, Leslie Lok'
and Sasa Zivkovic.
Leslie is an assistant professor and the BR coordinator'
at Cornell.
Allied with computational technology'
and with a focus on urbanism, her research and teaching'
explore the intersection of housing,'
urbanization, and mass customized construction methods'
at multiple scales.
She received her master of architecture at MIT in 2011'
and previously taught at McGill.
Sasa Zivkovic is an assistant professor also at Cornell,'
where he directs the robotic construction laboratory, ,'
an interdisciplinary research group that investigates'
the implementation of robotic-based construction'
technology.
He received his MArch at MIT in 2012'
when he was the recipient of the AIA certificate of merit.'
Prior to MIT, Zivkovic studied architecture and city planning'
in Stuttgart, where he was awarded a fellowship'
from the German National Academic Foundation.'
Sasa and Leslie's joint practice, HANNAH,"
leverages and augments ordinary technologies'
for material, spatial, and cultural experimentation'
in build projects across a whole diversity of scale.'
This amazing work is driven by tectonic and material'
explorations in architecture.
It's a platform, as they say, to unapologetically"
test and explore personal architectural obsessions'
surrounding material misuse, forms, construction, concrete,'
robots, trees, toolpaths, and buildings.'
The work is amazing.
And I would ask us to honor in the absence'
of in-person applause, and handshakes, autographs,'
and selfies, with questions, with good questions supplied'
by you tonight throughout the lecture via the webcast portal'
and on Facebook.
The webcast portal, the questions go right here.'
And if you're watching on Facebook,"
they're somewhere around you as well."
We'll be taking questions throughout the lecture."
So type them in as soon as you have them.'
And then we'll organize them and ask them"
at the end of the lecture.
So with that, over to Leslie and Sasa.'
And thank you so much for joining us here tonight.'
All right.
Thank you, Nicholas, for this great introduction.'
We're going to share our screen.
And we would also like to thank Andrew for the kind invitation.'
Both Leslie and I are thrilled to lecture here at MIT'
from Leslie's Cornell office.
And we send our greetings to the MIT community'
during those challenging times.
As alumni, we would not be presenting our work tonight'
if not for the amazing pedagogical landscape that'
is MIT.
So before we start the lecture, we'
would like to thank in no particular order'
some of the people who deeply influenced our work'
and thinking.
[INAUDIBLE],, Nadir, Adele, Yungho, Sheila, Andrew, Anna,'
Ranjha, Liam, our thesis advisor, thank you.'
The title of our lecture is forms of making.'
We think that making is fundamental to how'
we operate as HANNAH.
From the ground up, digital design and fabrication'
technologies are intrinsic to the making of our work,'
facilitating fundamentally new material methods,'
tectonic articulations, environmental practices,'
technological affordances, and forms of construction.'
As architectural designers, eight years out of school'
and we're now licensed, we consider"
ourselves to be biased generalists'
rather than specialists.
The various projects presented in this lecture'
combine a variety of methods and material,'
making geometries, and social narratives.'
We build and embrace shared technology.'
We also create open source construction machines,'
which we argue inevitably affect how we think'
and design through making.
In our work, we aim to mind the tension between machine means'
and architectural ends across scales.'
And we reclaim authorship over processes of construction'
that influence the way we can build or perhaps'
ought to build in the future.
At various scales, our work's performance"
and architectural expression are inherently'
derived from materiality, digital construction protocols,'
robotic routines, and bottom-up design logics.'
At the same time, in the mix of means,'
our work is inspired by precedent, program,'
ecological considerations, collective labor,'
personal obsessions, and the misuse of technology.'
Based on the title of our lecture,'
we're also interested in the F word."
And we admit that openly.
When discussing the F word, Andrea Simitch,'
our department chair at Cornell, talks about informed form.'
Augmented by information, form becomes a malleable concept,'
which implies that architecture is'
an interplay between aesthetic values of design'
and broader types of information that'
act upon form, that collaborate with form,'
or that produce synergies with form.'
And how does making inform architecture?'
How does environment, technology, program, history,'
and their discipline itself inform'
the making of architecture?
The following projects are a work in progress and aim'
to give expression through the design'
to some of these questions.
We've spent the last five years building an infrastructure"
and framework for architectural explorations across scales.'
So starting from the design of tools,'
moving to the prototypes and installations,'
and then combining on research into the construction'
of a small building.
About five years ago, Leslie and I'
became interested in a new method of making,'
namely concrete 3D printing.
And after starting a collaboration'
with building industry, we were disappointed'
by the limitations at the time.
And so in order to conduct research'
in advanced manufacturing and engage new methods of making,'
one needs the facilities, the means and tools'
to do such work.
So on the left, you can see the 3D printer'
that Leslie and I built in 2011 sitting on an MIT--'
Studio desk.
Studio desk.
And on the right, you see the printer'
that RCL developed at Cornell in 2016'
as part of an option studio.
The printer is fully open source.'
And that is very important to us.'
The printer runs off an Arduino board'
with slightly modified firmware.
A 3D model parts list and wiring diagram'
can be downloaded on our website.'
We think that fully unpacking the manufacturing'
tool or machine is an exciting opportunity for architects'
to reclaim authorship over processes of construction,'
which fundamentally influence the way we can build.'
While the machine is only a framework,'
our thesis is with new tools come'
new architectural opportunities.
We also believe that technology comes'
with a social responsibility to make these tools broadly'
available to all.
So this printer costs about $6,000 to make.'
It is very much inspired by the open source movement.'
And its realization is really only'
possible because of the generous open source community.'
And so we are interested in giving back to that community.'
The printer was built over a three-week period'
in a collaborative option studio at Cornell.'
And here you see the final photo shoot of the printer'
with Chris Battaglia in it, who played a very big role'
in the design and construction of the machine.'
And after a period of material development and machine'
modification, Daedalus is now able to print'
full-scale building components in foam,'
recycled plastic, and concrete.
For us, this new tool opens the door'
to novel architectural speculation.'
If there are any Cornell friends visiting this lecture,'
this is Rand Hall before the library renovation.'
Our interest in the printing was in its process.'
Like a three dimensional drawing,'
the machine horizontally deposits one line'
after another.
And if lines are shifted through corbelling,'
the printer creates spatial form.'
Inherent in this rather simple process'
is the complex architectural language'
of concrete 3D printing.
The 3D printer, a machine which has long'
been characterized as characterless due to having'
little to no constraints, is in fact exactly the opposite.'
It has plenty of character, maybe too much.'
In the project Additive Architectural Elements,'
our research question is, what is the architecture of 3D'
printed concrete?
How can materiality and the unique fabrication'
opportunities and constraints of the tool inform the design?'
And before we ask a question of what the architecture of 3D'
printed concrete, let's look into a prominent chapter"
of concrete architecture which inspires us.'
The development of reinforced concrete around 1850'
has enabled unprecedented architectural expression.'
Through the past 150-plus years, there'
have been various interpretation of what constitutes'
an architecture of concrete.
We might think of heroic cantilevers, fluidity,'
or a distinct articulation of [INAUDIBLE] form construction,'
processes, and exposed concrete structures.'
Admittedly, our concrete element from the previous slide'
produces certain visual linkages to Paul Rudolph's"
rough striated [INAUDIBLE].
By association, we ask ourselves,'
what if anything do we have in common'
with such work of architecture?
And for us, our concrete architecture'
is most intriguing when there is a symbiosis'
between the material or the method construction demands, as'
well as the idiosyncratic, willful, and biased expression'
of the architect.
The merging of the two irreconcilable worlds'
of technical reason with expressive intuition at times'
produces moments of stunning architectural brilliance,'
beauty, and intellectual satisfaction.'
So in both our research and practice,'
we aim to bring about and introduce such balance'
to new processes of making.
It's admittedly a work in progress."
And building the machine was perhaps'
the easy part with the aim to derive an architecture that'
is intrinsic to the additive manufacturing process.'
We experimented with dozens of initial concrete mixtures'
and printing failures to understand'
the materials and tolerance and this inherent urge'
for imprecision.
When printing in concrete, the same rules'
apply in the small desktop 3D printers,'
but gravity takes on an altogether different role'
in the process.
Cantilevers have to be carefully constructed.'
New support material strategies have to be developed,'
and toolpaths have to be carefully manipulated.'
We see this manipulation of 3D printing rule sets'
as a tremendous opportunity.
Concrete printing requires the development'
of an entirely new architectural language, which'
takes into account the limitations of the process,'
as well as performative advantage.'
So in this project, it aims to reveal the 3D printer's"
own and highly idiosyncratic architectural tectonics'
and narratives.
We chose prototypical motifs--
floor, column, door, window, wall, and ceiling--'
and began to develop strategies as'
to how the layering of concrete, this relentless three'
dimensional drawing of extruded lines of material'
and the act of corbelling can suggest'
new strategies for building.
So working with the constraint of gravity,'
this element here, the mushroom column,'
plays with cantilever over support material'
by printing upside down.
The horizontal striation results in structural assemblies'
that seamlessly transition between'
the vertical and horizontal.
In the 3D printed structure, all common architectural motifs'
and building components must be rethought to fit the logic'
of layer construction.
For example, a concrete printer cannot print in mid-air,'
therefore the otherwise rather simple task of creating'
a rectilinear window opening in the wall becomes a de facto'
impossibility.
So rather than drastically altering'
the process, such as stopping the machine to insert a beam,'
shortcomings become opportunities for design.'
So one logical consequence for the window'
is to cantilever incrementally, and become'
a triangular corbelled arch.
And suddenly a seemingly advanced technology'
relies on obsolete or archaic structural strategies,'
such as corbelling.
In the case of this element, force column, the modification'
of printing direction, such as printing upside down'
or printing a section, is deployed'
to overcome printer deficiencies.'
Printed in section, the force column'
hints at the potential to deposit material'
where structurally necessary.
And the smart poche wall, similar to the force column,'
explores some manipulation of concrete density'
to optimize for structural performance'
and how it might begin to be architecturally expressed'
in the wall assembly.
The potential for excessive ornamentation'
is brought up in the adornment.
In the full-scale prototype we were'
playing with delamination of layers'
to create screen-like moments of transparency.'
Ornamentation can also occur horizontally'
in the floornament here.
Besides patterning, the floornament'
can be structurally and algorithmically optimized.'
3D printing also opens the possibility'
of an integration of building systems and furniture.'
The sealing element is an expressive play'
on ducts for ventilation, reflectors for lighting,'
it becomes a performative poche.
There are multiple narratives at play in this project.'
And we chose to present the work with a particular speculative'
focus.
We can also discuss their work in various other terms as well.'
From a technical point of view, there'
are multiple advantages to 3D printing.'
All of the elements' geometries were constructed"
without the use of form work.
So that constitutes a paradigm shift for concrete construction'
and allows for a radical mass customization of buildings'
and building components.
There is great potential for material savings,'
because 3D printing can deposit material'
where structurally necessary, also,'
an enormous advantage in a path toward smarter construction.'
Undeniably, there is a certain formal agenda'
at play in this project.
And bottom-up processes are highly'
deterministic and important when it'
comes to form making informed by the digital process.'
Yet there are important top-down decisions to be made,'
which are harder to quantify, but necessary when'
determining the architecture of 3D printed concrete.'
We then explore how we can deploy'
the additive architectural elements in the building'
context.
The Fabricate Lilong Project explores'
the potential of computation of protocols,'
such as additive manufacturing at the architectural scale,'
[INAUDIBLE] housing at the urban scale.'
The smart poche well is expanded in the context'
of multi-unit housing.
It can be densified for structural load,'
thickened for party wall, and attenuated'
to meet the thinness of glazing transition.'
The corb window element is explored here'
as both window and entrance openings at the housing scale.'
And the ceiling element can inform individual modules'
or organize into a cross-modular system'
with mechanical connection across multiple units.'
Here the force column is transformed into an integrated'
wall and beams system.
At the cluster scale, smart poche walls'
are mass customized to address different domestic functions'
and expanded as poche cores for utilities or circulation'
that can be organized into continuous rowhouses.'
Apart from the typological transformation,'
the original spine organization of a linear semi-public space'
is transformed into a weaving network of semi-public alleys'
and courtyard spaces.
So here, designing with the additive architectural elements'
at the housing scale can offer alternate inspirations'
to build our city fabric.
The next project we want to show is at the furniture scale,'
informed fundamentally from the ground'
up by new processes of making materiality, and in this case'
also a strange kind of program.
The Rolling Stones is the winning design'
of the Folly/Function 2018 competition sponsored'
by the Architectural League of New York and Socrates Sculpture'
Park.
Conceptually, the idea of a folly operates twofold.'
The shapes and forms of the unfamiliar as cultural seating'
object constitute the first folly.'
And the act of rolling to reveal new curvature and seating'
profiles constitutes the second folly.'
And yes, it really is difficult to roll'
a heavy concrete chair, as difficult'
as it looks like in this slide.
So thank you, Alex and Chris.
Responding to the site of the park,'
the 23 seats can form a long continuous bench that becomes'
a destination and place marker.
They can also aggregate into smaller benches'
or disperse entirely to form different sized seating groups'
or solitary compositions.
And they provide a range of scale and seating'
configurations from stool to small chaise for the public.'
We played with the sectional profile'
to generate nine seating and lounging configurations'
and three basic prototypes with each turn revealing'
new curvature and seating profiles.'
Using the 3D printer to print in sections, number four rebar'
is embedded between the double layer section as reinforcement.'
To enable the creation of the cantilevered forms,'
the seats' interior is supported with a bed of gravel"
during printing.
And the layer of gravel remains imprinted on each chair's"
interior surface, giving it a geologic character,'
and also providing an honest reading of the fabrication'
process.
In this video, you can see a little bit of the testing'
and the design explorations that we'
did for this project, which started out'
as this transformation of the long bench object.'
And then the seats themselves can be dispersed'
in different ways in the park.
We tested different printing methods,'
but also looked at issues, such as reinforcement, which'
you will see in the next video.
So this is the printing process with the printer starting'
on the first layer on a sheet of plastic.'
As you can see, it's a labor intensive process."
Our machine is not fully automated.'
So it requires a lot of manpower to produce chairs.'
We did a series of reinforcement tests'
to establish what methods might be viable.'
This is one of the first projects'
that we used where rebar is embedded into the 3D print.'
So here you see how it's made.
It's a double layer printed with a manually inserted rebar"
profile that has been custom welded to fit the seating'
profile of the chair.
So printing these chairs takes about one full day.'
And we have since optimized the process'
for the second iteration of this project, which'
is the Rolling Stones 2.0 exhibit at the Momentary, which'
is a subsidiary of the Crystal Bridges Museum of American'
Art in Bentonville.
So besides exploring the architectural potential'
of horizontal layer printing, we are also'
interested in developing new processes of manufacturing'
at the lab.
So at RCL, based on--
sorry-- at RCL, based on Chris Battaglia's M.Arch thesis"
project, we developed a spatial method of concrete 3D printing,'
where the concrete gets deposited on a support'
material, in this case gravel.
Sub-additive 3D printing is a fundamental deviation'
from the standard process of 3D printing, which'
is a horizontal deposition of two paths layer upon layer.'
And we showed that in the various other projects prior.'
For certain complex geometries, like shells, this method'
has severe disadvantages.
Depositing cementitious material on a supportive aggregate'
is not a new thing.
The Philips Pavilion at the Brussels Expo '58"
was one of the first modern examples'
to panelize a large complex surface through land forming.'
So casting on a shaped hyperbolic sand form,'
multiple panels were produced as sections'
of the surface, transferred to the site,'
and then post tensioned to create the iconic structure.'
And so here's what's smart about this construction technique."
The same machine that prints the concrete'
is used to create the flexible gravel form work.'
So in the first step, the printer'
creates a surface that matches the curvature of the thin shell'
geometry, making its own form work.'
So this is what you see here, a tennis ball shaping'
the gravel mound, and then shaping the lines'
for 3D printing.
And then in the second step, the concrete material'
is deposited on the reusable gravel form work.'
So this is the first panel that Chris 3D printed'
with two layers of concrete.
And so with this method, one can rapidly'
print highly mass customized and optimized grid'
of thin shell structures.
Printing this with a horizontal layer deposition method'
is a difficult proposition.
And so here you see the excavation process'
and some final results of Chris's thesis project."
This printing process has been translated'
to also work with the robot.
And it's a bit messier than we would like it to be."
We have since developed a new method'
to machine or post-machine these pieces using a CNC Mill.'
This is something that we cannot show today,'
but if you're interested in knowing more about this"
project, we brought a paper for [INAUDIBLE],,'
and also have more information on the website.'
Using the 3D printer's flexibility,"
we can use form finding methods and structural optimization'
to determine the lattice density required'
at each point within the surface.'
So depending on the shape of the structure,'
we get different lattice patterns, which'
also reduces waste material.
In our research in the lab and in the practice,'
we think it is paramount to test full scale prototypes.'
So this is a mockup of sub-additive printed arches.'
Each component weighs roughly 150 kilograms'
and was printed in the span of one hour,'
and can be rolled up for easy assembly.'
As a new method, sub-additive printing leverage digital'
workflows to produce structurally, materially,'
and spatially optimized building components, while dramatically'
reducing waste material.
Contextually, the sub-additive project'
expands on a lineage of thin shell structures'
by the likes of Nervi, Candela, Isler, or Dieste.'
So we are currently working on improved printing accuracy,'
the integration of fiber reinforcement,'
and novel cement mixtures that don't have"
a massive environmental impact.
And the latter point, I think, is very important,'
because we cannot sustain concrete as a building material'
by saving material alone.
So the concrete has to fundamentally'
be rethought in the context of 3D printing'
to become a viable building material for the future.'
So here back to the tools, because a concrete printer'
can only get you that far.
Compared to other institutions, the RCL lab'
has very limited resources.
So we have to be inventive when it comes to equipment.'
As it turns out, one can go to eBay and purchase'
a used Kuka KR 200 for $8,000.
And this is how it arrives.
The robot was formerly a welding robot for GM,'
producing cars in a plant in Louisiana.'
While the machine is proprietary,'
it was important for us to keep the rest of the project'
open source.
In terms of cost, it is hard to find a cheaper robot.'
A certain amount of hacking is required'
to make this robot work for architectural production.'
All information on how to set this up'
is available on the RCL website.
And in an ACADIA paper written by the lab'
called "Open Source Factory."
For us, this robot has enabled research'
beyond the three axis constraints of the 3D printer'
and is a new technological means to inform'
form and new material.
So Log Knot is a project that emerged'
from our first initial exploration with custom'
wood-based tools for the robot that Leslie just showed.'
And wood is an interesting material'
because it surrounds us in so many ways.'
As a building material, we encounter wood'
in the shape of two by fours or plywood'
or other standardized dimensions.'
But as this image shows, wood comes from trees'
that are usually non-standard.
Log Knot is a robotically fabricated'
architectural installation which aims to expand and optimize'
the use of entire trees and irregular timber'
geometries and construction.
The research team, which included Brian Havener,'
a research associate, who did this project in his M.Arch'
studio, and then continued to work on it as a research'
associate in the lab.
The team examined whether regular--'
irregular roundwood geometries can'
be processed to construct compound curvature assemblies.'
The project creates an infinite loop'
of roundwood curving three dimensionally along its length.'
And the project borrowed strategies'
from traditional wood building and manufacturing'
while implementing contemporary technologies'
to achieve precision and mass customization.'
Components are computationally processed'
to form a spatially complex figure eight knot.'
This is a series of diagrams and studies'
and a conceptual model on the site.'
In a reciprocal design process, the project'
fosters synergies and feedback between material fabrication,'
digital form, and full scale construction.'
New technological paradigms, such as'
robotic-based fabrication, radically challenge'
our understanding of wood as a building material,'
but have yet to take better advantage of wood'
as a sustainable and smart material for construction.'
Small roundwood members or tree forks are usually not utilized'
for construction purposes because today sawmills are not'
equipped to process those irregular tree geometries.'
So this project uses computation to optimize'
each joint for tension forces.
And each of the joints is precisely'
rotated to resist forces and local buckling.'
Here you see a detail of the various mortise and tendon'
joints that we tested for the project.'
Each joint is secured by three lag bolts.'
And Log Knot is designed for disassembly,'
therefore relying upon the use of steel lag bolts instead'
of wooden dowels.
The fabrication was done on our Kuka platform'
using a custom CNC mill and effector.'
The mill first creates a planar surface on the log,'
and then creates the mortise and tendon rough cut.'
We then use the side of the end mill'
to smoothen the rough cut, which saves a lot of time,'
and is an efficient way of utilizing the tool that we have'
at hand and the end effector.
And to prevent checking and shaking,'
the milled end grains were covered in pentacryl, which'
is a non-toxic wood stabilizer.
And so this prevented checking, and allowed'
us to assemble these pieces more or less accurately.'
As we worked with small budgets, we'
did not have access to heavy machinery,'
and therefore developed a self-sufficient construction'
method that requires only minimal form work or support.'
So the idea was, can we design a joint'
that is so smart that it guides the shape and form of the wood'
assembly?
So each component was lifted and placed by hand.'
And while we think concrete is heavy,'
wood is also surprisingly heavy in these dimensions.'
So this is a considerable effort.'
And then in the second step, we fastened the wood in place'
using the geometry of the joint to guide the form of the arc.'
So here you see a video of the assembly process.'
And so to hold up the structure during construction,'
all that is required is a minimal support of attached two'
by fours.
So you see them emerging at the top of the frame, the two'
two-by-fours nailed to the wood structure'
to give some additional support.
Unfamiliar notions of craftsmanship and precision,'
both digital and analog, emerged from Log Knot's"
conceptual design practice and characteristic construction'
technique.
Log Knot was exhibited as part of Cornell's 2018 Biennial"
called "Duration--
Passage, Persistent, Survival," and addresses this theme'
on multiple levels.
Environmental cycles, birth, growth, and decay'
are intrinsic to complex forest ecosystems and processes.'
Conceptually and spatially, the Log Knot project'
references these internal cycles and reciprocal relationships'
between systems, both natural and technical.'
The infinite looping structure is an interplay'
between archaic natural geometry, advanced computation,'
and state of the art digital fabrication.'
By questioning how forests are used as a resource,'
Log Knot provides a critical commentary'
on various perpetual wood cycles--'
economic, environmental, and cultural in nature.'
From the ground up, new material means and construction methods'
are intrinsic to the making of this last project.'
The Ashen Cabin recalibrates expectations'
around digital fabrication methods,'
and out of contextual necessity explores'
the architectural opportunities of digital-analog construction'
hybrids from the ground up to the scale of the building.'
And informed by multiple forces, the building'
follows two strands of material narratives.'
It is 3D printed from concrete and clothed'
in a robotically fabricated envelope constructed'
from irregular wood logs.
The making of the building is also'
informed by the key environmental crisis'
of the ash trees in North America.'
Since its discovery in the US in 2002,'
the emerald ash borer killed tens of millions of ash trees,'
drastically transforming the entire forest ecosystems'
in the process.
The EAB threatens to eradicate nearly all'
of the 8.7 billion ash trees in North America.'
And as of October 2018, it is found in 35 states'
and several Canadian provinces.
As a reference, 10% of all trees in New York state'
are ash trees.
So that is almost 1 in 10 trees you see will die or are dying.'
And this is a huge problem.
And our means of construction might'
contribute to some form of gruesome, after-the-effect'
remedy.
In the first material narrative, the 3D'
printed concrete structure is characterized'
by three programmatic areas--
a table, a storage seat element, and a 6.5 meter'
tall working fireplace.
It has a footprint of 3 by 3 meters'
and lifts off the ground on printed legs, which'
adjust to the sloped terrain.
The legs are printed in components and function'
as sacrificial zero waste form work'
for the main structural system to eliminate'
substantial construction waste.
It used a cast-in-place concrete structure with custom rebar.'
This slide here shows the interior of the concrete leg'
with inserted rebar cage.
And the drone photo here showing the nested modules on site.'
They're also nested so that they can be transported"
fairly easily on the truck.
And here's a top view of the [INAUDIBLE] structure"
with the rebar cages.
Each leg is then filled with foam in the void of the legs.'
And concrete is poured in between to form a structure.'
And going up, here's the assembly of the chimney."
We have turned into little contractors'
with our scaffolding.
The cabin here, as you can see, is expressive.'
And corbelling becomes a generative motif.'
There is a tectonic expression that'
is generated by the fabrication method and materiality.'
You can see the underside of the cabin showing'
the corbelled legs connecting to the terrain on nine points,'
actually one of which does not touch the ground.'
In deliberately designing a cabin and not a pavilion'
or installation, we have to address'
border architectural considerations, such as,'
how does the building touch the ground?'
How do we 3D print a fireplace?
Similar to the window element, corbelling'
is used to produce the opening of the working fireplace.'
And here the articulation of the horizontal striation'
is used as a tectonic strategy to produce'
seamless vertical transition from the leg'
to a 4-inch concrete slab, and finally to the chimney above.'
The [INAUDIBLE] code and printed path'
are exploited in the ornamental pattern of the 3D printed floor'
slabs.
The slabs are also organized in a nine-square grid,'
reflecting the interlocking pattern of the legs beneath.'
And finally, here is the envelope'
that slides from trees to question preconceived notions'
about material standards in wood.'
In 2018, the EAB arrived at Cornell.'
In order to use such trees in construction,'
we developed a new process to build the wood envelope.'
Available ash trees are harvested'
from the Cornell Arnot Forest.
And by implementing high precision'
3D scanning and robotic-based fabrication technology, as you'
can see here, irregularly shaped waste wood'
is transformed into an abundantly available,'
affordable, and morbidly sustainable'
building material for the anthropocene.'
Utilizing the Kuka KR 200 robot with a custom five horsepower'
band saw and effector, we can robotically'
slice irregular tree logs into naturally curved boards'
and strategically assemble the boards to form a variety'
of surface conditions.
The boards follow the geometry of the naturally bent logs.'
And they can be sliced into various'
and also varying thicknesses up to 2 millimeter thin.'
Also, by adjusting the thickness of the cut,'
the robotically carved timber boards'
can be assembled as complex single curvature surfaces'
or double curvature surfaces.
Here you see this drawing shows the number of logs'
that were harvested from 10 trees at the forest.'
And a quick GIF showing how one of the logs'
can be sliced according to the fork geometry.'
Geometric form finding and assembly protocols'
from form to log and log to form have been'
developed for this project.
We started with an initial massing design,'
and then according to the log that we have sourced,'
the log curvature served as a feedback'
into the finalized design forms, that there'
is a reciprocity between the top down design and also'
the available raw resources.
And the system was elevation drawing'
Architecturally, the natural bent wood planks'
create the enclosure.
And the curvature of the wood is strategically'
deployed to highlight moments of architectural importance,'
as you can see in this diagram.
And so no longer bound to the paradigm'
of industrial standardization, such as a wooden two-by-four,'
this project revisits bygone woodcraft and design'
based on organic found and living materials.'
How can irregular timber geometries'
be used to create a fully functioning, ventilated,'
waterproof, and insulated high performance building envelope?'
How does the envelope turn corners?'
What are the detail connections between wood and concrete?'
How are windows integrated into the wall system?'
And how can the natural curvature of the log'
inform an awning, an entrance, a door'
handle, or highlight a corner opening'
for an extremely articulated drain spout or frame views?'
Technically, the envelope functions'
similar to the logic of a SIP panel.'
The panels are insulated using a two component closed-cell foam,'
which is fully biodegradable.
The facade assembly is fully ventilated'
and is detailed to manage shrinkage and transformation'
of wooden boards to offset the air drying process,'
and does not require an additional rain screen.'
And here's a view of the interior of the cabin."
This shows the ceiling and the roof structure'
of the cabin using--
combining with a typical two-by-six rafter.'
The cabin combined a variety of fabrication methods, material'
applications, geometries, and types of construction.'
So at various scale, the cabin's performance, structure,"
and architectural expression is inherently'
derived from these digital construction'
protocols, robotic routines, materiality, and design logics.'
And together, the various and sometimes conflicting means,'
robotic or otherwise, inherently inform'
the form and the architectural expression of this project.'
It is important to emphasize that this occurs'
at the scale of a building from ground'
up using newly invented forms of making.'
Thank you.
And we also want to thank our team,'
because while it's the two of us presenting,"
this work would not be possible without a very big team'
of highly dedicated students, former students, research'
associates, and research assistants.'
So thank you, guys.
Those are also your projects.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So we've finished a bit early--
10 minutes.
We thought, as this is a digital format lecture,'
we don't want to go over.
So this might give us a bit more time'
for questions or an earlier end to our evenings.'
Well, thank you.
I just want to thank you all so much.'
As I said in my introduction, these'
are not normal times, nor times to pretend they're normal,"
but the kind of inventiveness and imagination of the work'
allows us to think about all kinds of possibilities,'
including for new kinds of work and new kinds of being,'
even amidst all sorts of uncertainties.'
So I really want to express gratitude on behalf of myself,'
of the community, the school, and of the over 700 viewers'
that we've had with us this evening for the lecture,"
which is just an astonishing testament to you'
and a testament to this larger community as well.'
I wanted to start--
I think we have all learned about the differential'
staminas of online and in-person events over the last few weeks,'
but we'll push this a little bit further,"
because we've also got lots of questions from the audience."
And I guess before we even go to those,'
I wanted to ask you to go back to the F word,'
to the very beginning of your lecture,'
and some thoughts about form and form related to two ideas'
that we're all grappling with at the moment, which"
is certainty and uncertainty.
We had a moment in the very first flush'
of parametric digital architecture'
in the last few decades of a kind of profusion'
of form, and form about which lots of things'
were all too certain and deterministically made.'
And I guess one thing I very much appreciated'
about the work, but I wanted to prompt'
you to talk about a little bit more'
is a kind of an abundance of form,'
but an abundance of form that juxtaposed'
the ability of digital shapes to expand, overlap,'
multiply, and create a great deal of complexity,'
complexity that hearkens back to the low cost of labor of things'
like the King's College Chapel, but then"
a different kind of complexity that'
makes me think of the origins of the Land Art Movement'
at Cornell that your Log Knot project is obviously'
a tribute to as well, and the idea of entropy.'
Gordon Matta-Clark and Robert Smithson'
met on the Cornell campus.
And the kind of profusion of form'
that comes from the operation of entropy'
is often seen as a kind of contrast'
between the deterministic nature of digital form.'
But in your work, the two are very much in collaboration.'
So I wanted you to--
part of what makes the concrete work beautiful'
is the mistakes or the uncertainties'
around the precision and that sort of surround the precision'
in the process.
And the same is obviously true in the beautiful cutting'
of logs and the entropy of living forms and knots and all'
the rest.
So that question of form and certainty/uncertainty'
seems to be--
to run very deep in the work.
And I wondered if you could reflect a little bit more'
explicitly on it while I have a moment to get together'
everybody else's questions.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you for that question.
I think for a while, it was difficult to talk about form'
in our discipline, because it might have been sort of misused'
within a certain kind of moment of time.'
But I think that was also--
that was necessary for that particular discourse project.'
I think what differentiates here our work is this connection'
to materiality.
And this is by no means a kind of solitary invention of ours.'
So there are many fellow colleagues and offices'
that are deeply invested in materiality'
and form and digital form, and perhaps'
in architectural expression.
So I think the certainty or uncertainty in these project'
comes through the material, which brings its own'
challenges, and which sometimes work in your favor,'
and sometimes don't, which sometimes produce happy"
accidents, and sometimes don't.
And so that gives it something concrete to push back, I think.'
And so the materiality is a really important'
determining factor in the work.
What I want to point out is that for us it's"
important, especially in the last project,'
that we apply these methods of material form'
making to the scale of a building,'
because that expands the discourse'
and brings other issues to this kind of research, which'
usually has a tendency to focus on prototypes,'
or to focus on installations, or to focus on sort of smaller'
scale investigations and has yet to arrive in many cases'
at the building, which comes with its own constraints'
and issues that kind of contaminate the diagram.'
And I think also--
and to address that, there are more than just,'
let's say, our willful desire for"
a particular formal expression that we have to engage with.'
So direction-- I mean, as simple as, again, direction of roof.'
How do we produce an interesting architectural strategy'
that connects with the ground?
So I think a lot of these other, let's say,"
challenges, construction challenges,'
also inform the form.
So the process of making, so there is the material,'
but there is also then what we can make, and what we can test,'
and what we can generate that allows'
us to play with the form.
That's great.
I'm now going to move to questions from the audience."
And I'm going to synthesize and put a couple of questions"
together in the next two questions.'
There are some really interesting questions-- one'
from Pamela Tang, who's the head of our Alumni Association, who"
I'm delighted to see here, and then"
another question from another audience'
member about traditional architectural techniques'
as they relate to this process.
So there's a question about study models"
and the role of modeling, both digitally and otherwise'
in the process.
And then there's another really interesting question"
about drawing.
When you're moving so kind of promiscuously between planning"
section and thinking about how these things are made,'
does it relate to how you think about objects and environments'
and planning section as you also deploy more traditional media?'
So drawings and models in the process.'
I think models is--
our model testing has a big range of scale.'
So we have the traditional--
your hand size, let's say, massing models"
that you play with, but I think oftentimes we engage much more'
with like prototyping scale, so looking at half scale,'
for example, in the cabin project when we want'
to test out the log design and geometry to really figure out'
the building system.
The layering, we actually have to-- we'
produce a half scale corner prototype.'
So I think model making becomes a really, really integral part'
of the design.
And then playing with both at kind of the design study model'
scale, and also actually at the material scale'
is really important.
It allows us to test out, "Oh, the wood is cracked," or, "Oh,'
wow.
This is really, really heavy," when'
we thought it would be lighter when you're playing"
with smaller trees and logs.
And then once you squish a big log,'
then you realize how heavy it can be.'
Regarding drawings and representations,'
what we found interesting about the printing process'
is that it is very similar to drawing,'
because it's the deposition of line up on line"
to build a three dimensional form.'
So in a funny way, these are sort of sketches,'
the prints that we do.
This is all very much work in progress.'
I think you can see the sort of roughness'
of some of these experimentations,'
for better or worse.
And so I think drawing sort of through model'
is something that we are interested'
in these explorations.
Regarding the question of traditional building'
precedents, I think this is something'
that we tangentially mentioned in the presentation'
and would probably need a bit more backup'
and sort of thoroughness to be developed into a stronger'
argument.
But we do think that, for example, the use of roundwoods'
in construction, or the use of irregular members,'
we could have shown sort of the German Fachwerkhaus series.'
So there is a legacy architecturally, but maybe'
also in some of the design disciplines or engineering,'
such as shipbuilding and so on, that these projects reference.'
And certainly we have looked at that without now'
explicitly pointing it out in the lecture.'
So these references are floating around in the work,'
I would say.
And also maybe referring back to the one'
of the questions about drawing, you'
were talking about modes of representation'
and how that plays in, let's say,"
the process of the making of some of these projects.'
And I think because of what the digital tool allows us to do,'
sometimes in certain cases--
and a lot of it can be due to time constraints--'
you bypass technical drawings.
So in the case of the cabin, from the design'
to the building, there is some level of,'
let's say, drawing in terms of plans and sections,"
but in terms of making and building the building,'
since we are designing it, but we're also building it"
ourselves, there is that one level that is kind of taken out'
normally when you have an architect designer,'
and you give it to a contractor.
And the drawing needs to communicate in that stage'
to construct something.
And the cabin in that case, during the construction'
process, the drawing was more of an exploration tool,'
rather than a means of communicating how to build it.'
So in the prototypes or even in the concrete part,'
a lot of the time it was we'd go from the 3D model"
then to the print paths, and then'
to the actual 3D printing and construction'
of the physical object.
So the drawing part, in some cases, are bypassed.'
And then the question goes back to,'
after we build the building, how do we share it?'
How do we represent it with the community?'
And so then there is a return back'
to drawing it using conventional drawing standards.'
In the case of the Rolling Stone,'
we also went back-- actually started'
a machine-drawing project that we didn't share here,"
because we started to question, how do you'
represent a 3D printed object?
And using the conventional plans in section doesn't fully, let's"
say, translate or express the design logic of this 3D printed'
project in that case.
Just a quick follow-up to that.
One of the-- so we struggle with this question of drawing,'
I would say.
So Leslie outlined some of the struggles going'
from digital to prototype.
So in some ways, as I've said, we"
conceptualize drawing through the model.'
But what is missing, and we think'
is a kind of missed opportunity, is using'
drawing as a generative tool.
And its role as a generative tool'
is kind of submerged in here.
So that's why we think the model is"
a generative tool in our case, but we are exploring ways'
currently in these projects to think about drawing'
as a generative tool.
So you think about the machine and the drawing'
in combination as a generative tool.'
And so these are some of our next research steps.'
I'm going to ask a quick follow-up"
question that's also come up.
But does the idea of drawing relate'
to how you're actually spending your time now"
when so much of us don't have access"
to the tools and shops and large equipment'
that we think and work with?
So currently we are working in the office'
on scaling up some of these projects.'
So we would like to 3D print a residential project'
and a sort of housing project following thereafter.'
So this requires a certain set of, I guess,'
conventional design methods.
I think by now we have developed an understanding'
of some of these material processes and behaviors'
that we can take them into account'
while drawing and designing.
And so that's kind of maybe an intuitive"
layer that has emerged within the practice that substitutes'
for some of the model making.
But it is unfortunate that we cannot access our shop right'
now like so many others.
The robots are sitting and waiting.'
Taking a break.
They're sleeping.
I would-- so back to the robots, there's a lot of people"
in the questions interested in the actual physics'
of production and materiality, and everything from,'
can you can you print rebar to some technical questions around'
how--
whether you're experimenting with or collaborating"
with others at Cornell on more sustainable or different'
concrete mixes.
How much of the practice at this point'
is involved in that materiality and experimentation'
about materiality?
And how much of it is related to the questions'
of process and form that we were also talking about?'
Well, the RCL session is actually'
currently collaborating with researchers at Cornell'
in engineering and design and looking'
at using different natural fiber as reinforcement.'
It is one has to address that ultimately cement or sand are'
limited resources.
And we have to rethink the composition'
or the mixture of such.
And this is what is so great about interdisciplinary'
collaboration.
That's not something that, let's say,"
an architect or designer alone can address.'
So there is definitely that strand'
that we are pursuing and looking at how we can'
think at the material scale.
And in terms of the sort of technicalities and material'
printing rebars, one thing is--
maybe we have slightly mentioned it in the lecture,'
that the making of the Rolling Stones'
is actually quite labor intensive, because we'
have to gravel the pieces while we print.'
And it's not a fully automated process."
And I think that comes down to our priority of what we're"
interested in exploring and the way the printer was constructed'
as a method and as a tool to explore'
what we're interested in exploring architecturally."
So it wasn't our initial intention"
to design like a full streamlined automated system.'
So we were interested in developing and hacking,'
to an extent, to allow us to do what we like to do.'
So therefore, in terms of, let's say,"
different material, printing multiple material'
at the same time, we definitely see the possibilities.'
And there's ongoing-- plenty of ongoing research"
that does that.
There's already research at other institutes"
that looks at robotically welding rebar and so on.'
So those technologies exist.
However, they don't play yet and occupy"
this sort of larger space in our work currently.'
To follow up on that, I think there'
may be two components to this question.'
So one is besides collaborations in academia,'
we're interested in collaboration"
with the building industry.
And I think to scale up some of these processes of making,'
one has to engage building industry'
at a fundamental level.
And this transformation will take time.'
The building industry is changing.'
It's one of the last sort of non-automated industries."
And so for better or worse, I think'
this will come as a process in the future.'
So automation will arrive in construction.'
And I think it's important that we as architects have agency"
in it by becoming experts in some of these tools'
and technologies.
There's a lot of questions on how things scale up."
Obviously, we're not just going to get an enormous robot"
to attack a redwood tree.
So how do you scale up the means and scale of the work'
while keeping the precision of the knowledge'
and understanding that you've developed at the scales"
that you have?
I think the way that we've done it"
or have been doing it is to recognize what'
are the positive-- what are the pros and cons of, let's say,"
a particular tool and material system,'
and leveraging what is good about it and what it can do,'
and not try to force it to do everything.'
So meaning that, let's say, in the cabin,"
the envelope is robotically fabricated,'
but the roof structure in the end that we used'
was a rather simple roof joist sort of construction'
with rafters and so on and so forth.'
So we definitely could apply also'
the same robotically slicing for the roof,'
but I think recognizing--
well, due to time constraint as well--'
when we should deploy the robot, and when we can customize,'
and then when can we also take advantage'
of traditional and conventional building techniques?'
So it's not about reinventing the wheel,"
but finding a smart and smarter way to customize,'
and in this case mass customize, using our tools'
and material at the larger scale.'
And I think to scale up, we have to understand and acknowledge'
the shortcomings and advantages of specific tools and material,'
and use it to their advantage.
And we can't disclose any details,"
but there are big printers that can actually print houses.'
So these developments have kind of'
happened in the past couple of years.'
So when we started the printer development in 2016,'
this technology was only available in a very limited'
way.
And so in the last four years, things have changed'
drastically, I would say.
So scaling up becomes more and more feasible and possible.'
And so hopefully, the next time we meet,'
we can share some of that.
Wonderful.
I'm going to synthesize.
I think we have time for about two more questions.'
But for the first one, I'm going to synthesize two questions"
on the theme of improvisation on both how much-- there's a--"
what one question describes is a beautiful kind'
of uncanny and improvisational posture to the cabin in how--'
the way it perches on the ground.'
But this also relates to a larger question'
of what is the--
a lot of questions on the precision of the lifecycle'
of data in a process of scanning and making things,'
making slices of wood that don't turn out quite"
how you expect them to, I'm sure,"
and then probably also need to be scanned.'
And then where is design in that process?'
And where is improvisation?
And what's the difference between the two,"
between the precision and imprecision of a process that,'
I'm guessing, resembles jazz more than Bach?"
But maybe you can expand on that a little bit.'
Yeah.
Well, I think the cabin is a good example,'
because essentially, what it is is'
a feedback between an intended design and the material,'
on the other hand.
So you go into the forest.
You say, OK, roughly, I need 10 logs.'
Roughly, I want to do this with the wood.'
And then you go and cut down 10 trees.'
And you find things that are similar to what'
you had in mind, but in the end, you'
don't get exactly what you were shopping for,"
as opposed to when you go to Home Depot'
and buy a two by four.
You know that if you select the straight one,'
it's going to be a two by four.
And so there's a feedback between the material."
So we would literally go out into the forest'
and look at this stuff, and have to then redesign based'
on the things that we find.
So that's a kind of improvisation"
that happens by design in the cabin,'
because the material sort of forces that upon the design'
process.
So this is a challenge.
It's not easy to think that way and to design"
a project that way, because there's this uncertainty"
about the material.
So until the very last minute, we don't really"
know what the cabin will look like due'
to some of these factors.
I mean, there is maybe the top down, let's say,"
intuition for designers and architects.'
And then we take full advantage of that.'
And so also recognizing there are design opportunities'
that come from curvature.
Of course, we would leverage that, and maybe'
exaggerate certain moments, especially the example'
of the drain spout.
And so there are this sort of top-down desire,'
expressive desire that we want to achieve,'
and then like Sasa said, there is the feedback'
between the material character.
So it's not entirely totally open and total improvisation."
So there is a level of calibration within the process.'
We also intentionally a lot of the time when'
it comes to form avoid full optimization,'
and not allowing, let's say, optimization really play out"
the design fully.
And that's also due to our partial bias"
towards having this design expression'
that we want to play with.
I mean, some of this also has to do with a particular structure'
that we work with.
So there's the lab, and then there's the office."
And so the lab does fundamental research.'
It looks at concrete mixtures and collaborates'
with researchers, and tries to advance'
that sort of more engineering-based'
architectural discourse.
But in the practice, we have the freedom'
to bring in other narratives and to, I guess,'
sort of contaminate the ideal optimized engineered state'
of things.
And this is what the cabin really'
is, because there's no way to sort of optimize this,"
or there's no way to justify it through optimization."
So there are other narratives, architectural design'
narratives, at play that are important here.'
And so this is a project that demonstrates'
that these two kind of realms can be combined and connected.'
So that provides a good follow-up.'
I'm still going to allow myself--"
questions keep cropping up.
So this will be the second to last question.'
But I'm going to synthesize a couple of questions"
with the observation that one of Marshall McLuhan's"
laws of media is that the future resembles'
not the present, but the past that preceded the present.'
And so in your rejection of optimization, which was,'
of course, often part of the language of modern'
architecture, if not always part of the actual substance'
of modern architecture, there's--"
and in a lot of the questions, there's questions, for example,"
here about questions of locality.'
Does the idea of looking out your window at your materials'
relate to this idea of localness of architecture,'
that outside of modern--
what we've come to expect to be globe-spanning supply chains?"
Or does it also-- it also relates'
to a question about ornamentation and decoration,'
which often served a functional purpose historically,'
but also has a different kind of character in the work'
that you've shown.
So maybe if you could reflect a little bit'
on this idea of the past that preceded the present, as well'
as the future, and how these questions of optimization,'
ornamentation, locality are potentially challenged'
by some of the fundamental questions'
that your work raises.
[INAUDIBLE]
I don't know.
Maybe the question is not clear.
This is a good question.
Yeah.
I think the locality plays a big role,'
let's say, in both the Log Knot and the cabin."
And one thing is that I don't think"
we would have produced the work that we showed today'
if we were not in Ithaca and Cornell,'
and what this context provides us.'
And so maybe the role of the wood, the role of the situation'
with the ash tree, I would say in the beginning'
it wasn't something that we see as like, oh,"
we need to work with some local material,'
but it presented itself as an opportunity'
for us to think about, oh, well, now there'
is this infestation with the ash trees.'
What can we do with it?
And it happened to be a big problem in New York state.'
So this actually prompted us to think about,'
now how can we use these trees locally?'
And if this is a resource that is all over North America,'
how can we--
and in such a non-standardized way,'
then how can we develop building strategies that we can actually'
upcycle these wood, these logs?
And so then the deserved locality'
began to play a much stronger role once we were presented'
with this opportunity here.
And also, with the 3D printing as well, one of the biggest'
advantages, you could 3D print on-site,'
and on-site 3D printing has been happening now'
also at the building scale.
Not in our work, but as Sasa mentioned.'
The challenge, let's say, for our printer"
was that our site was extremely uneven.'
And 3D printing requires a fairly stable flat ground'
condition to print.
So the locality topic can come into the local resources.'
How do you reuse local resources?'
And also how you can print on-site actually,'
the production of a building on-site'
as kind of a local focus.
And that way, that also eliminates'
a lot of the transportations, and so on and so forth.'
So that is-- there is definitely that narrative embedded'
in this process.
The question of past, future, present histories in the work,'
I think is an interesting one.
And it's a challenging one to answer, I would say."
I don't think that there is a definitive answer."
I think what we've come to enjoy through working much"
more in the practice is the freedom to leave things up'
for interpretation also, which I think is something'
that we do with the cabin, because in the practice,'
we're not bound to some of the constraints of the lab."
And so I think depending on who looks at this,'
you might have a different answer to your question.'
And that's also a good thing, I would say."
So that's not really a shortcoming"
generally within a discourse-based discipline.'
Well, that's maybe a good prompt for the last question that's"
come up.
I mean, I would reflect on the--
we are very sorry not to be in the physical space at MIT,'
but one of the things that this current improvisation'
gives us is the ability to welcome,'
as we have tonight, both our current students'
and a large segment of our alumni into a shared space, as'
limited as this can be described as a space.'
And so it's a nice moment to ask a question"
that several people in the audience have asked, too.'
Maybe just answer very briefly what about your work is MIT,'
or what about your work have you taken'
from MIT into these other places and ecologies distinctively'
as you packed your bag for your journey from here'
into your career.
Wow.
So much.
I mean, I think, there's the culture of hacking,"
the DIY, make your own machine, figure it out, try it out,'
test something, make something.
That is, I think, fundamental to MIT and its culture.'
But then in the department, I think'
there's a very rigorous commitment to discourse"
and to creating an argument for a project and honing in on it'
and refining it.
And this is at least what we attempt to do,'
not successfully, I think, in all cases,'
but that's the ambition.
And so this is sort of what we carry as a package from MIT.'
Well, that's a beautiful moment to end on."
So I would say that to all of you watching who we can't see"
and who we are very sad not to be physically present'
with, I would apologize deeply for our own improvisations'
tonight.
This is the first time any of us have done this.'
I'm standing in a house with a computer"
on top of a set of cardboard boxes outside of the frame.'
And we're all making this up as we go along, maybe"
hearkening back to the beautiful improvisation,'
hopefully, in the work that we've seen tonight."
And so with that apology also comes again'
the enormous gratitude for joining us together'
for something whose unnecessary qualities are'
deeply necessary in this time.
So thank you for bringing the serendipity and grace'
of your work to help us create a little bit of serendipity'
and grace here tonight, on behalf of myself,'
but mostly of everyone else watching who doesn't"
have the ability to speak.
So thanks guys, I'm going to give you a hand."
Thank you.
